<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II: The Double Wedding</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Double Wedding</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="chapter-2-1" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>It was one of those days when earth and heaven alike appear to smile. A day almost warm, certainly genial; for the wind had dropped, the sky was of a vivid blue, and the sun had a genuine feeling of warmth in its kiss. From the overhanging eaves the snow dropped down in soft, moist lumps, stained by the thaw, and the quay, where a goodly crowd had collected, was quickly transformed under foot into a sea of mud.</p>
				<p>It almost seemed as if the little town was out on a holiday. People came and went, dressed in gay attire, stood about all along the bank of the river, staring up at the stately gabled house which looked so wonderfully gay with its decorations of flags and valuable tapestries and stuffs hanging from the numerous windows.</p>
				<p>That house on the quay⁠—and it was the finest house in the town⁠—was indeed the centre of attraction. It was from there that the air of holiday-making emanated, and certainly from there that the gay sounds of music and revelry came wafted on the crisp, wintry air.</p>
				<p>Mynheer Beresteyn had come to his house in Amersfoort, of which city he was chief civic magistrate, in order to celebrate the double wedding. No wonder such an event was made an excuse for a holiday. Burgomaster Beresteyn never did things by halves, and his hospitality was certain to be lavish. Already doles and largesse had been poured out at the porch of <abbr>St.</abbr> Maria Kerk; a crowd of beggars more or less indigent, crippled, sick, or merely greedy, had assembled there very early in the morning. Whoever was there was sure to get something. And there was plenty to see besides: the brides and bridegrooms and the wedding party; and of course His Highness the Stadtholder was a sight in himself. He did not often go abroad these days, for his health was no longer as good as it was. He had aged considerably, looked moody and ailing for the most part. There had been sinister rumours, too. The widowed Archduchess Isabella, Mistress of Flanders and Brabant, hated him because he held the United Provinces of the Netherlands free from the bondage of Spain. And in Spain the arts of poison and of secret assassination were carried on with as much perfection as they had ever been in Italy in the days of the Borgias.</p>
				<p>However, all such dark thoughts must be put away for the day. This is a festive occasion for Amersfoort, when every anxiety for the fate of the poor fatherland⁠—ever threatened and ever sore-pressed⁠—must be laid to rest. Let the brides and bridegrooms see naught but merry faces⁠—happy auguries of the auspicious days to come.</p>
				<p>Here they come⁠—the entire wedding party⁠—walking down the narrow streets from the quay to the <abbr>St.</abbr> Maria Kerk. Everyone is walking, even the Stadtholder. He is conspicuous by his great height, and the richness of his attire: embroidered doublet, slashed sleeves, priceless lace. His face looks thin and drawn, but he has lost nothing of his martial bearing, nor have his eyes lost their eagle glance. He had come over the previous afternoon from Utrecht, where he was in camp, and had deigned to grace Mynheer Beresteyn’s house by sleeping under its roof. It was understood that he would return to Utrecht after the banquet which was to follow the religious ceremony, and he, too, for this one day was obviously making a valiant attempt to cast off the load of anxiety attendant upon ceaseless campaigning. In truth, the Archduchess Isabella, not content with the fairest provinces of Belgium, with Flanders, Brabant, and the Hainault, which her father, King Philip of Spain, had ceded to her absolutely, was even now striving to force some of the United Provinces back under the domination of Spain.</p>
				<p>Small wonder then that the Stadtholder, wearied and sick, the shadow of his former self, was no longer sure of a wholehearted welcome when he showed himself abroad. Nor had the people forgiven him the judicial murder of Olden Barneveldt⁠—the trusted councillor in the past, afterwards the bitter opponent of his master’s ambitions⁠—or his severity towards Barneveldt’s sons. His relentless severity toward those who offended him, his reckless ambition and stern disciplinarianism, had made him an object of terror rather than of affection. Nevertheless, he still stood for the upholder of the liberties of the United Provinces, the finest captain of his age, who by his endurance, his military skill, and his unswerving patriotism, kept his country’s frontiers free from the incursions of the most powerful armies of the time. He still stood as the man who had swept the sacred soil of the Netherlands free from Spanish foes and Spanish tyranny, who had amplified and consolidated the work of his father and firmly established the independence of the Republic. Because of what he had done in the past, men like Mynheer Beresteyn and those of his kind still looked upon him with grave respect, as the chosen of God, the prophet sent to them from Heaven to keep the horrors of a new Spanish invasion away from their land.</p>
				<p>And when Maurice of Nassau came to a small city like Amersfoort, as he had done today, he was received with veneration, if not with the old cheers and acclamations. His arbitrary temper was momentarily forgotten, his restless ambition condoned, in the joy of beholding the man who had fought for them, never spared himself until he had won for them all those civil and religious liberties which they prized above all the treasures of the earth.</p>
				<p>All heads, then, were bowed in respectful silence as he walked by, with the brides one on each side of him. But the loving glances of the crowd, the jokes and whispered words of cheer and greeting, were reserved for Mynheer Beresteyn and for his family.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-2-2" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>Two brides, and both comely! <span xml:lang="nl">Jongejuffrouw</span> Katharina van den Poele, the only child of the wealthy shipowner, member of the Dutch East India Company, a solid burgher both physically and financially, and one of the props of his country’s overseas commerce. His daughter, in rich brocade, with stiff stomacher that vainly strove to compress her ample proportions, splashed through the mud on her high pattens beside the Stadtholder, her heavily be-ringed hands clinging to the folds of her gown, so as to save them from being soiled. Stolid and complacent, she heard with a satisfied smile the many compliments that rose from out the crowd on her dazzling complexion, her smoothly brushed hair and magnificent jewelry. The fair Katharina beamed with good-nature and looked the picture of happiness, despite the fact that her bridegroom, who walked immediately behind her, appeared somewhat moody, considering the occasion.</p>
				<p>Nicolaes Beresteyn, the Burgomaster’s only son, had in truth, no reason for surliness. His bride excited universal admiration, his own private fortune would be more than doubled by the dowry which the good Kaatje brought him along with her plump person, and all the disagreements between himself and his father, all the treachery and the deceit of the past three months, had been amply forgiven. It was all the more strange, therefore, that on this day his face alone should appear as a reflection of the Stadtholder’s silent mood, and more than one comment was made thereon as he passed.</p>
				<p>Of the other bride and bridegroom it is perhaps more difficult to speak. We all know the beautiful picture of Gilda Beresteyn which Frans Hals made of her some three months previously. That incomparable master of portraiture has rendered that indescribable air of force, coupled with extreme youthfulness, which was her greatest charm. Often she hath been called etherial, yet I do not see how that description could apply to one who was so essentially alive as Gilda Beresteyn. Her blue eyes always sparkled with vitality, and whenever she was moved⁠—which was often enough⁠—they became as dark as sloes. Probably the word came to be applied to her because there was always a little something mysterious about her⁠—an enigmatic little smile, which suggested merriment that came from within rather than in response to an outside joke. Many have remarked that her smile was the gentle reflex of her lover’s sparkling gaiety.</p>
				<p>Him⁠—that ardent lover, sobered bridegroom now⁠—you cannot forget, not whilst Frans Hals’ immortal work, whom he hath called <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.painting">The Laughing Cavalier</i>, depicts him in all is irrepressible joyousness, and gladdens the eye with its exhilaration and its magnificent <i xml:lang="fr">gaité de coeur</i>⁠—a veritable nepenthe for jaded seek-sorrows.</p>
				<p>For once in his life, as he walks gravely behind his bride, there is a look of seriousness not unmixed with impatience in his laughing eyes. A frown, too, between his brows. The crowd have at once taken him to its heart⁠—especially the women. Those who have no sons wish for one at once, who would grow up just like him: tall and stately as a young sapling, with an air of breeding seldom seen in the sons of the Low Countries, and wearing his magnificent bridal attire as if he had never worn leather jerkin or worsted doublet in his life. The women admire the richly wrought doublet, the priceless lace at neck and wrists, the plumed hat that frames a face alike youthful and determined. But everyone marvels why a bridegroom should go to church in high riding-boots and spurred at this hour. Many whispered comments are exchanged as he goes by.</p>
				<p>“A stranger, so they say.”</p>
				<p>“Though he has fought in the Netherlands.”</p>
				<p>“Ah, but he really comes from England.”</p>
				<p>“A romantic story. Never knew his father until recently.”</p>
				<p>Some said the bridegroom’s name was really Blakeney, and that his father was a very rich and very great gentleman over in England. But there were others who remembered him well when he was just a penniless soldier of fortune who went by the name of Diogenes. No one knew him then by any other, and no one but Frans Hals, the painter over in Haarlem, knew whence he had come and what was his parentage. In those days his merry laughter would rouse the echoes of the old city where he and his two boon companions⁠—such a quaint pair of loons!⁠—were wont to dwell in the intervals of selling their swords to the highest bidders.</p>
				<p>Ay, <span xml:lang="nl">Jongejuffrouw</span> Beresteyn’s stranger bridegroom had fought in France and in Flanders, in Groningen and Brabant and ’twas said that recently he had saved the life of the Stadtholder at great risk of his own. Many more tales were whispered about him, which would take too long to relate, while the crowd stood agape all down the quay and up the Korte Gracht as far as the <abbr>St.</abbr> Maria Kerk.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-2-3" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>Indeed, Mynheer Beresteyn had not done things by halves. He had chosen that the happy double event should take place at the old house at Amersfoort, where his children had been born, and where he had spent the few happy years of his married life, rather than at Haarlem, which was his business and official residence. He wished, for the occasion, to be just a happy father rather than the distinguished functionary, the head of the Guild of Armourers, one of the most important burghers of the Province, and second only in the council chamber to the Stadtholder.</p>
				<p>The religious ceremony was over by noon. It was now mid-afternoon, and the wedding guests had assembled in the stately home on the quay for a gargantuan feast. The Stadtholder sat at a magnificently decked-out table at the far end of the panelled room, on a raised dais surmounted by a canopy of Flemish tapestry, all specially erected for the occasion. Around this privileged board sat the wedding party; Mynheer Beresteyn, grave and sedate, a man who had seen much of life, had suffered a great deal, and even now scarcely dared to give his sense of joy full play. He gazed from time to time on his daughter with something of anxiety as well as of pride. Then the worthy shipowner, member of the Dutch East India Company, and <i xml:lang="fr">mejuroffluw</i>, his wife⁠—the father and mother of Nicolaes Beresteyn’s bride, pompous and fleshy, and with an air of prosperous complacence about their persons which contrasted strangely with Mynheer Beresteyn’s anxious earnestness. Finally, the two bridal couples, of whom more anon.</p>
				<p>In the body of the nobly proportioned banqueting-hall, a vast concourse of guests had assembled around two huge tables, which were decked out with costly linen and plate, and literally groaned under the succulent dishes which serving-men repeatedly placed there for the delectation of the merry party. Roast capons and geese, fish from the Rhyn and from the sea, pasties made up of oysters and quails, and, above all, a constant supply of delicious Rhine or Spanish wines, according as the guests desired light or heady liquor.</p>
				<p>A perpetual buzz of talk, intermingled with many an outburst of hilarity and an occasional song, filled the somewhat stuffy air of the room to the exclusion of any individual sound.</p>
				<p>The ladies plied their fans vigorously, and some of the men, warmed by good cheer, had thrown their padded doublets open and loosened their leather belts. The brides-elect sat one on each side of the Stadtholder; a strange contrast, in truth. Kaatje van den Poele, just a young edition of her mother, her well-rounded figure already showing signs of the inevitable coming stoutness, comely to look at, with succulent cheeks shining like rosy apples, her face with the wide-open, prominent eyes, beaming with good-nature and the vigorous application of cold water. Well-mannered, too, for she never spoke unless spoken to, but sat munching her food with naive delight, and whenever her somewhat moody bridegroom hazarded a laboured compliment or joke, she broke into a pleasant giggle, jerked her elbow at him, and muttered a “Fie, Klaas!” which put and end to further conversation.</p>
				<p>Gilda Beresteyn, who sat at the Stadtholder’s right hand, was silent, too; demure, not a little prim, but with her, even the most casual observer became conscious that beneath the formal demeanor there ran an undercurrent of emotional and pulsating life. The terrible experience which she had gone through a few brief months ago had given to her deep blue eyes a glance that was vividly passionate, yet withal resposeful, and with a curiously childlike expression of trust within its depth.</p>
				<p>The stiff bridal robes which convention decreed that she should wear gave her an air of dignity, even whilst it enhanced the youthfulness of her personality. There was all the roundness in her figure which is the attribute of her race; yet, despite her plump shoulders and full throat, her little round face and firm bosom, there remained something ethereal about her, a spirituality and a strength which inspired reverence, even whilst her beauty provoked admiring glances.</p>
				<p>“Your Highness is not eating,” she remarked timidly.</p>
				<p>“My head aches,” Maurice of Nassau replied moodily. “I cannot eat. I think I must be overtired,” he went on more pleasantly as he met the girl’s kind blue eyes fixed searchingly upon him. “A little fresh air will do me good. Don’t disturb anyone,” he continued hastily, as he rose to his feet and turned to go to the nearest open window.</p>
				<p>Beresteyn quickly followed him. The prince looked faint and ill, and had to lean on his host’s arm as he tottered towards the window. The little incident was noticed by a few. It caused consternation and the exchange of portentful glances.</p>
				<p>A grave-looking man in sober black velvet doublet and sable hose quickly rose from the table and joined the Stadtholder and Mynheer Beresteyn at the window. He was the English physician especially brought across to watch over the health of the illustrious sufferer.</p>
				<p>Gilda turned to her neighbour. Her eyes had suddenly filled with tears, but when she met his glance the ghost of a smile immediately crept around her mouth.</p>
				<p>“It seems almost wicked,” she said simply “to be so happy now.”</p>
				<p>Unseen by the rest of the company, the man next to her took her tiny hand and raised it to his lips.</p>
				<p>“At times, even today,” she went on softly, “it all seems like a dream. Your wooing, my dear lord, hath been so tempestuous. Less than three months ago I did not know of your existence⁠—”</p>
				<p>“My wooing hath been over-slow for my taste!” he broke in with a short, impatient sigh. “Three months, you say? And for me you are still a shadow, an exquisite sprite that eludes me behind an impenetrable, a damnable wall of conventions, even though my very sinews ache with longing to hold you in mine arms forever and for aye!”</p>
				<p>He looked her straight between the eyes, so straight and with such a tantalizing glance that a hot blush rose swiftly to her cheeks; whereupon he laughed again⁠—a merry, a careless, infectious laugh it was⁠—and squeezed her hand so tightly that he made her gasp.</p>
				<p>“You are always ready to laugh, my lord,” she murmured reproachfully.</p>
				<p>“Always,” he riposted. “And now, how can I help it? I must laugh, or else curse with impatience. It is scarce three o’clock now, and not before many hours can we be free of this chattering throng.”</p>
				<p>Then, as she remained silent, with eyes cast down now and the warm flush still lingering in her cheeks, he went on, with brusque impatience, his voice sunk to a quick, penetrating whisper:</p>
				<p>“If anything should part me from you now, <i xml:lang="it">ma donna</i>, I verily believe that I should kill someone or myself!”</p>
				<p>He paused, almost disconcerted. It had never been his wont to talk of his feelings. The transient sentiments that in the past had grazed his senses, without touching his heart, had only led him to careless protestations, forgotten as soon as made. He himself marvelled at the depth of his love for this exquisite creature who had so suddenly come into his life, bringing with her a fragrance of youth and of purity, and withal of fervid passion, such as he had never dreamed of through the many vicissitudes of his adventurous life.</p>
				<p>Still she did not speak, and he was content to look on her, satisfied that she was in truth too completely happy at this hour to give vent to her feelings in so many words. He loved to watch the play of emotions in her telltale face, the pursed-up little mouth, so ready to smile, and those violet-tinted eyes, now and then raised to him in perfect trust and abandonment of self, then veiled once more demurely under his provoking glance.</p>
				<p>He loved to tease her, for then she blushed, and her long lashes drew a delicately pencilled shadow upon her cheeks. He loved to say things that frightened her, for then she would look up with a quick, inquiring glance, search his own with a palpitating expression that quickly melted again into one of bliss.</p>
				<p>“You look so demure, <i xml:lang="it">ma donna</i>,” he exclaimed whimsically, “that I vow I’ll create a scandal⁠—leap across the table and kiss Kaatje, for instance⁠—just to see if it would make you laugh!”</p>
				<p>“Do not make fun of Kaatje, my lord,” Gilda admonished. “She hath more depth of feeling than you give her credit for.”</p>
				<p>“I do not doubt her depth of feeling, dear heart,” he retorted with mock earnestness. “But, oh, good <abbr>St.</abbr> Bavon help me! Have you ever seen so solid a yokemate, or,” he added, and pointed to Nicolaes Beresteyn, who sat moody and sullen, toying with his food, beside his equally silent bride, “so ardent a bridegroom? Verily, the dear lady reminds me of those succulent fish pasties they make over in England, white and stodgy, and rather heavy on the stomach, but, oh, so splendidly nourishing!”</p>
				<p>“Fie! Now you are mocking again.”</p>
				<p>“How can I help it, dear heart, when you persist in looking so solemn⁠—so solemn, that, in the midst of all this hilarity, I am forcibly reminded of all the rude things you said to me that night at the inn in Leyden, and I am left to marvel how you ever came to change your opinion of me?”</p>
				<p>“I changed my opinion of you,” she rejoined earnestly, “when I learned how you were ready to give your life to save the Stadtholder from those abominable murderers; and almost lost it,” she added under her breath, “to save my brother Nicolaes from the consequence of his own treachery.”</p>
				<p>“Hush! That is all over and done with now, <i xml:lang="it">ma donna</i>,” he retorted lightly. “Nicolaes has become a sober burgher, devoted to his solid Kaatje and to the cause of the Netherlands; and I have sold my liberty to the fairest tyrant that ever enslaved a man’s soul.”</p>
				<p>“Do you regret it,” she queried shyly, “already?”</p>
				<p>“Already!” he assented gravely. “I am kicking against my bonds, longing for that freedom which in the past kept my stomach empty and my head erect.”</p>
				<p>“Will you never be serious?” she retorted.</p>
				<p>“Never, while I live. My journey to England killed my only attempt at sobriety, for there I found that the stock to which I belonged was both irreproachable and grave, had been so all the while that I, the most recent scion of so noble a race, was roaming about the world, the most shiftless and thriftless vagabond it had ever seen. But in England”⁠—he sighed and raised his eyes and hands in mock solemnity⁠—“in England the climate is so atrocious that the people become grim-visaged and square-toed through constantly watching the rain coming down. Or else,” he added, with another suppressed ripple of that infectious laugh of his, “the climate in England has become so atrocious because there are so many square-toed folk about. I was such a very little while in England,” he concluded with utmost gravity, “I had not time to make up my mind which way it went.”</p>
				<p>“Methinks you told me,” she rejoined, “that your home in England is beautiful and stately.”</p>
				<p>“It is both, dear heart,” he replied more seriously; “and I shall learn to love it when you have dwelt therein. I should love it even now if it had ever been hallowed by the presence of my mother.”</p>
				<p>“She never went there?”</p>
				<p>“No, never. My father came to Holland in Leicester’s train. He married my mother in Haarlem, then deserted her and left her there to starve. My friend Frans Hals cared for me after she died. That is the whole of her history. It does not make for deep, filial affection, does it?”</p>
				<p>“But you have seen your father now. Affection will come in time.”</p>
				<p>“Yes; I have seen him, thanks to your father, who brought us together. I have seen my home in Sussex, where one day, please God, you’ll reign as its mistress.”</p>
				<p>“I, the wife of an English lord!” she sighed. “I can scarcely credit it.”</p>
				<p>“Nor can I, dear heart,” he answered lightly; “for that you’ll never be. Let me try and explain to you just how it all is, for, in truth, English honours are hard to understand. My father is an English gentleman with no handle to his name. Blake of Blakeney they call him over there; and I am his only son. It seems that he rendered signal services to his king of late, who thereupon desired to confer upon him one of those honours which we over here find it so difficult to apprise. My father, however, either because he is advanced in years or because he desired to show me some singular mark of favour, petitioned King James to bestow the proposed honour upon his only son. Thus am I Sir Percy Blakeney, it seems, without any merit on my part. Funny is it not? And I who, for years, was known by no name save Diogenes, one of three vagabonds, with perhaps more wits, but certainly no more worth, than my two compeers!”</p>
				<p>“Then I should call you Sir Percy?” she concluded. “Yet I cannot get used to the name.”</p>
				<p>“You might even call me Percy,” he suggested; “for thus was I baptized at my dear mother’s wish. Though, in truth, I had forgotten it until my father insisted on it that I could not be called Diogenes by mine own servants, and that he himself could not present me to his Majesty the King of England under so fanciful a name.”</p>
				<p>“I like best to think of you as Diogenes,” she murmured softly. “Thus I knew you first, and your brother philosophers, Socrates and Pythagoras⁠—such a quaint trio, and all of you so unsuited to your names! I wish,” she added with a sigh, “that they were here now.”</p>
				<p>“And they should be here,” he assented. “I am deeply anxious. But Pythagoras⁠—”</p>
				<p>He broke off abruptly. Mynheer Beresteyn’s voice called to him from the recess by the open window.</p>
				<p>“A goblet of wine!” Mynheer commanded; “for his Highness.”</p>
				<p>Diogenes was about to comply with the order, but Nicolaes forestalled him. Already he had poured out the wine.</p>
				<p>“Let me take it,” he said curtly, took up the goblet and went with it to the window. He offered it to the Stadtholder, who drank greedily.</p>
				<p>It was but a brief incident. Nicolaes had remained beside the prince while the latter drank; then he returned, with the empty goblet in his hand, to take his place once more beside his stolid and solid bride.</p>
				<p>“You were speaking of Pythagoras, sir,” Gilda rejoined, as soon as Diogenes was once more seated beside her. “I never know which is which of the two dear souls. Is Pythagoras the lean one with the deep, bass voice?”</p>
				<p>“No. He is the fat one, with the round, red nose,” Diogenes replied gravely. “He was at Ede the night before last, and was seen there, at the tavern of the Crow’s Nest, somewhere after midnight, imbibing copious draughts of hot, spiced ale. After that all traces of him have vanished. But he must have started to join me here, as this had been prearranged, and I fear me that he lost his way on that <i xml:lang="nl">verfloekte</i> waste. I have sent Socrates, my lean comrade⁠—he with the deep, bass voice⁠⁠—together with a search party, to look for poor Pythagoras upon the Veluwe. They should be here, in truth, and⁠—”</p>
				<p>But the next word died in his throat. He jumped to his feet.</p>
				<p>“The Stadtholder!” he exclaimed. “He hath fainted.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-2-4" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>Indeed, there was quite a commotion now in the window recess, where Prince Maurice had remained all this while by the open casement, inhaling the fresh, keen air. The English physician stood beside him, and Mynheer Beresteyn was gazing with anxious eyes on the master to whom, in spite of all, he had remained so splendidly loyal. The dizziness had apparently come on quite suddenly, while the Stadtholder was acknowledging the acclamations of the crowd who had seen and cheered him. He tottered and would have fallen but for the physician’s supporting arm.</p>
				<p>Not many of the guests had noticed the incident. They were for the most part too much absorbed in their enjoyment of the feast to pay attention to what went on in other parts of the room. But Diogenes had seen it and was already over by the window; and Nicolaes Beresteyn, too, had jumped to his feet. He looked wide-eyed and scared, even whilst the stolid Kaatje, flushed with good cheer, remained perfectly unconcerned, munching some sweetmeats which seemed to delight her palate.</p>
				<p>The Stadtholder, however, had quickly recovered. The faintness passed off as suddenly as it came, but it left the illustrious guest more silent and moody than before. His face had become of a yellowish pallor, and his eyes looked sunken as if consumed with fever. But he chose to return to his seat under the dais, and this time he called to Diogenes to give him the support of his arm.</p>
				<p>“ ’Twas scarce worth while, eh, my friend,” he said bitterly, “to risk your precious young life in order to save this precarious one. Had Stoutenburg’s bomb done the assassin’s work, it would only have anticipated events by less than three months.”</p>
				<p>“Your Highness is overtired,” Diogenes rejoined simply. “Complete rest in the midst of your friends would fight this insidious sickness far better than the wisest of physicians.”</p>
				<p>“What do you mean?” the Stadtholder immediately retorted, his keen, hawk-like glance searching the soldier’s smiling face. “Why should you say ‘in the midst of your friends?’ ” he went on huskily. “You don’t mean⁠—?”</p>
				<p>“What, your Highness?”</p>
				<p>“I mean⁠—you said it so strangely⁠—as if⁠—”</p>
				<p>“I, your Highness?” Diogenes queried, not a little surprised at the Stadtholder’s febrile agitation.</p>
				<p>“I myself have oft wondered⁠—”</p>
				<p>Maurice of Nassau paused abruptly, rested his elbows on the table, and for a moment or two remained quite still, his forehead buried in his hands. Gilda gazed on him wide-eyed and tearful; even Kaatje ceased to munch. It seemed terrible to be so great a man, wielding such power, commanding such obedience, and to be reduced to a mere babbling sufferer, fearing phantoms and eagerly gleaning any words of comfort that might come from loyal lips.</p>
				<p>Diogenes had remained silent, too; his eyes, usually so full of lightheartedness and merriment, had a strange, searching glitter in them now. A minute or two later the prince had pulled himself together, tried to look unconcerned, and assumed a geniality which obviously he was far from feeling. But it was to Diogenes that he spoke once more.</p>
				<p>“Anyhow, I could not rest yet awhile, my friend,” he said with a sigh; “whilst the Archduchess threatens Gelderland, the De Berg is making ready to cross the Ijssel.”</p>
				<p>“Your Highness’s armies under your Highness’s command,” rejoined the soldier firmly, “can drive the Archduchess’s hosts out of Gelderland, and send Henri de Berg back across the Ijssel. Maurice of Nassau is still the finest commander in Europe, even⁠—”</p>
				<p>He paused, and the Stadtholder broke in bitterly:</p>
				<p>“Even though he is a dying man, you mean.”</p>
				<p>“No!” here broke in Gilda, with glowing fervour. “I swear that nothing was further from my lord’s thoughts. Sir,” she added, and turned boldly to her lover, “you spoke with such confidence just now. A toast, I pray you, so that we may all join in expressions of loyalty to our guest and sovereign lord, the Stadtholder!”</p>
				<p>She poured a goblet full of wine. Diogenes gave her a quick glance of approval. Then he picked up the goblet, stood upon his seat, and placed one foot on the table.</p>
				<p>“Long life to your Highness!” he cried aloud. “May it please God to punish your enemies and to give victory unto your cause!”</p>
				<p>Then, holding the goblet aloft, he called at the top of his voice:</p>
				<p>“Maurice of Nassau and the cause of Liberty!”</p>
				<p>Everyone rose, and a rousing cheer went echoing round the room. It was heard and taken up lustily by the crowd outside, until the very walls of the ancient city echoed the loyal toast, from the grim towers of Koppel Poort to the Vrouwetoren of <abbr>St.</abbr> Maria Kerk; from gateway to gateway, and rampart to rampart. And the bells of <abbr>St.</abbr> Joris and <abbr>St.</abbr> Maria took up the joyful call and sent peal after peal of bells resounding gleefully through the keen, wintry air.</p>
				<p>“Maurice of Nassau!” rang the chimes. “Nassau and liberty!”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-2-5" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>But after this manifestation of joy and enthusiasm, comparative silence fell upon the wedding assembly. None but those who had partaken over freely of Mynheer Beresteyn’s good cheer could fail to see that the Stadtholder felt ill, and only kept up a semblance of gaiety by a mighty effort of his iron will. Thereafter, conversation became subdued. People talked in whispers, an atmosphere of constraint born of anxiety reigned there where lighthearted gaiety had a while ago held undisputed sway. The host himself did his best to revive the temper of his guests. Serving-men and maids were ordered to go around more briskly with the wine. One or two of the younger men hazarded the traditional jokes which usually obtained at wedding feasts; but those who laughed did so shamefacedly. It seemed as if a vague terror held erstwhile chattering tongues in check.</p>
				<p>The Stadtholder, leaning back against the cushions of his chair, spoke very little. His long, nervy fingers played incessantly with crumbs and pellets of bread. He looked impatient and ill at ease, like a man who wants to get away yet fears to offend his host. He had kept Diogenes by his side this time, and Beresteyn was able to snatch a few last words with his daughter. Once she was married, her husband would take her to his home in England one day, and the thought of parting from the child he loved was weighing the father’s spirit down.</p>
				<p>“ ’Tis the first time,” he said sadly, “that you will pass out of my keeping. You were the precious heritage bequeathed to me by your dead mother. Now ’tis to a stranger that I am entrusting my priceless treasure.”</p>
				<p>“A stranger, father,” riposted Gilda quietly, “who hath proved himself worthy of the truth. And when we do go to England,” she went on gaily, “there will only be a narrow strip of water between us, and that is easily crossed.”</p>
				<p>Beresteyn gave a quickly smothered sigh. He looked across at the stranger to whom, as he said, he was about to hand over the most precious gift he possessed. Handsome he was, that erstwhile penniless soldier of fortune; handsome and brave, frank and loyal, and with that saving grace of lighthearted gaiety in him which had helped him through the past terrible crisis in his life, and brought him to the safe haven of a stately home in England and wealthy father, eager to make amends for the wrongs committed long ago.</p>
				<p>But still a stranger for all that, a man who had seen more of the seamy side of the world, who had struggled more, suffered more⁠—ay, perhaps sinned more⁠—than those of his rank in life usually did at his age. Something of that rough-and-tumble life of the soldier of fortune, without home or kindred, who sells his sword to the highest bidder, and knows no master save his own will, must have left its mark upon the temperament of the man. Despite the humorous twinkle in the eyes, the bantering curl on the lip, the man’s face bore the impress of the devil-may-care existence that takes no heed of the morrow. And at times, when it was in repose, there was a strangely grim look in it of determination as well as of turbulent passions, not always held in check.</p>
				<p>Beresteyn sighed with inward apprehension. His well-ordered mind, the mind of a Dutch middle-class burgher, precise and unemotional, could not quite fathom that of the Anglo-Saxon⁠—the most romantic and the most calculating, and the most impulsive and the most studied, the most sensuous and most self-repressed temperament that ever set the rest of the world wondering. He could see the reckless scapegrace, the thoughtless adventurer, fuming and fretting under the restraint put upon him by the cut-and-dried conventions attendant upon these wedding ceremonies could watch him literally writhing under the knowing looks and time-honoured innuendos which custom deemed allowable on these occasions. His hands indeed must be itching to come in contact with the checks of mocking friends and smug relatives, all eager to give advice or to chaff the young bride, until the hot blood rushed to her cheeks and tears of annoyance gather in her eyes.</p>
				<p>The whole atmosphere of noise and drinking⁠—ay, of good-humour and complacency⁠—did, in truth, grate upon Diogenes’ nerves. He had not lied to Gilda nor yet exaggerated his sentiments when he said that his sinews ached with longing to seize her and carry her away into solitude and quiet, where nought would come to disturb their love-dream; away upon his horse, her soft arms encircling his neck, her head resting on his shoulder, her dear face turned up to his gaze, with those heavenly eyes closed in rapture; the delicate mouth slightly parted, showing a vision of tiny teeth, a tear mayhap trembling on her lashes, a soft blush mantling on her cheek. Away! Across the ocean to that stately home in England, where the spring air was soft with the scent of violets and of fruit blossom, and where beside the river the reeds murmured a soft accompaniment to songs of passion and hymns of love. Away from all save the shrine which he had set up for her in his heart; from all save the haven of his arms.</p>
				<p>To feel that, and then be forced to sit and discuss plans for the undoing of the Spanish commander or for the relief of Arnheim, was, in fact, more than Diogenes’ restive temperament could stand. His attention began to wander, his answers became evasive; so much so that, after a while, the Stadtholder, eyeing him closely, remarked with the pale ghost of a smile:</p>
				<p>“ ’Tis no use fretting and fuming, my friend. Your English blood is too mutinous for this sober country and its multitude of stodgy conventions. One of these demands that your bride shall sit here till the last of the guests has departed, and only a few fussy and interfering old <i xml:lang="fr">tantes</i> are left to unrobe her and commiserate with her over her future lot⁠—a slave to a bullying husband, a handmaid to her exacting lord. Every middle-aged frump in the Netherlands hath some story to tell that will bring tears to a young bride’s eyes or a blush to her cheeks.”</p>
				<p>“Please God,” Diogenes ejaculated fervently. “Gilda will be spared that.”</p>
				<p>“Impossible, you rogue!” the Stadtholder retorted, amused despite his moodiness by the soldier’s fretful temper. “The conventions⁠—”</p>
				<p>“<i xml:lang="nl">Verfloekt</i> will be the conventions as far as we are concerned,” Diogenes rejoined hotly. “And if your Highness would but help⁠—” he added impulsively.</p>
				<p>“I? What can I do?”</p>
				<p>“Give the signal for dispersal,” Diogenes entreated; “and graciously promise to forgive me if, for the first time in my life, I act with disrespect toward your Highness.”</p>
				<p>“But, man, how will that help you?” the Stadtholder demurred.</p>
				<p>“I must get away from all this wearying bombast, this jabbering and scraping and all these puppy-tricks!” Diogenes exclaimed with comical fierceness. “I must get away ere my wife becomes a doll and a puppet, tossed into my arms by a lot of irresponsible monkeys! If I have to stay here much longer, your Highness,” he added earnestly “I vow that I shall flee from it all, leave an angel to weep for my abominable desertion of what I hold more priceless than all the world, and an outraged father to curse the day when so reckless an adventurer crossed his daughter’s path. But stand this any longer I cannot!” he concluded, and, with a quick sweep of the arm, he pointed to the chattering, buzzing crowd below. “And if your Highness will not help me⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Who said I would not help you, you hotheaded rashling?” the Stadtholder broke in composedly. “You know very well that I can refuse you nothing, not even the furtherance of one of your madcap schemes. And as for disrespect⁠—why, as you say, in the midst of so much bowing and scraping some of us are eager for disrespect as an aging spinster for amorous overtures. By way of a change, you know.”</p>
				<p>He spoke quite simply and with an undercurrent of genuine sympathy in his tone, as a man towards his friend. Something of the old Maurice of Nassau seemed for the moment to have swept aside the arbitrary tyrant whom men had learned to hate as well as to obey. Diogenes’ irascible mood melted suddenly in the sunshine of the Stadtholder’s indulgent smile, the mocking glance faded out of his eyes, and he said with unwonted earnestness:</p>
				<p>“No wonder that men have gone to death or to glory under your leadership.”</p>
				<p>“Would you follow me again if I called?” the prince retorted.</p>
				<p>“Your Highness hath no need of me. The United Provinces are free, her burghers are free men. ’Tis time to sheathe the sword, and a man might be allowed, methinks, to dream of happiness.”</p>
				<p>“Is your happiness bound up with the mad scheme for which you want my help?”</p>
				<p>“Ay, my dear lord!” Diogenes replied. “And, secure in your gracious promise, I swear that naught can keep me from the scheme now save mine own demise.”</p>
				<p>“There are more arbitrary things than death, my friend,” the Stadtholder mused.</p>
				<p>“Possibly, your Highness,” the soldier answered lightly; “but not for me tonight.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-2-6" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>More than one chronicler of the time hath averred that Maurice of Nassau had in truth a soft corner in his heart for the man who had saved him from the bomb prepared by the Lord of Stoutenburg, and would yield to the “Laughing Cavalier” when others, less privileged, were made to feel the weight of his arbitrary temper. Be that as it may, he certainly on this occasion was as good as his word. Wearied with all these endless ceremonials, he was no doubt glad enough to take his departure, and anon he gave the signal for a general breaking up of the party by rising, and, in a loud voice, thanking Mynheer Beresteyn for his lavish hospitality.</p>
				<p>“An you will pardon this abrupt departure,” he concluded with unwonted graciousness, “I would fain get to horse. By starting within the hour, I could reach Utrecht before dark.”</p>
				<p>All the guests had risen, too, and there was the usual hubbub and noise attendant on the dispersal of so large a party. That Stadtholder stepped down from the dais, Mynheer Beresteyn and the English physician remaining by his side, while the bridal party brought up the rear. Room was made for his Highness to walk down the room, the men standing bareheaded and the women curtseying as he passed. But he did not speak to anyone, only nodded perfunctorily to those whom he knew personally. Obviously he felt ill and tired, and his moodiness was, for the most part, commented on with sympathy.</p>
				<p>The brides and bridegrooms, on the other hand, had to withstand a veritable fusillade of banter, which Nicolaes Beresteyn received sulkily, and the solid Kaatje with much complacence. Indeed, this bride was willing enough to be chaffed, had even a saucy reply handy when she was teased, and ogled her friends slily as she went by. But Gilda remained silent and demure. I don’t think that she heard a word that was said. She literally seemed to glide across the room like the veritable sprite her ardent lover had called her. Her tiny hand, white and slightly fluttering, rested on his arm, lost in the richly embroidered folds of his magnificent doublet. She was not fully conscious of her actions, moved along as in a dream, without the exertion of her will. She was wont to speak afterwards of this brief progress of hers through the crowded room with the chattering throng of friends all around, as a walk through air. Nothing seemed to her to exist. There was no room, no crowd, no noise. She alone existed, and ethereally. Her lover was there, however, and she was fully conscious of his will. She knew that anon she would be a captive in his arms, to be dealt with my him as he liked; and this caused her to feel that fearful and yet wholly content.</p>
				<p>He, Diogenes, on the other hand, was the picture of fretful impatience, squeezing his soft felt hat in his hand as if it were the throat of some deadly enemy. He never once looked at his bride; probably if he had he would have lost the last shred of self-control, would have seized her in his arms and carried her away then and there, regardless of the respect due to the Stadtholder and to his host.</p>
				<p>But the trial, though severe to any ebullient temper, was not of long duration. Anon the Stadtholder was in the hall, booted once more and spurred, and surrounded by his equerries and by the bridal party.</p>
				<p>His bodyguard encumbered the hall, their steel bonnets and short breastplates reflecting the wintry light which came, many-hued, through the tall, stained glass windows. In the rear the wedding guests were crowding forward to catch a last glimpse of the Stadtholder, and of the pageant of his departure. The great hall door had been thrown open, and through it, framed in the richness of the heavy oaken jambs, a picture appeared, gay, animated, brilliant, such as the small city had never before seen.</p>
				<p>There was the holiday throng, moving ceaselessly in an ever flowing and glittering stream. The women in huge, winged hoods and short kirtles, the men in fur bonnets and sleeved coats, were strolling up and down the quay. There were the inevitable musicians with pipes, viols, and sackbuts, pushing their way through the dense mass of people, with a retinue behind them of young people and old, and of children, all stepping it to the measure of the tune. There was the swarthy foreigner with his monkey dressed out in gaily coloured rags, and the hawker with his tray full of bright handkerchiefs, of glass beads, chains, and amulets, crying out his wares. It was, in fact, a holiday crowd, drawn thither by Mynheer Beresteyn’s largesse; the shopkeepers with their wives, who had been induced to shut down shop for the afternoon, as if some official function had been in progress; the apprentices getting in everybody’s way, hilarious and full of mischief, trying to steal the hawkers’ wares, or to play impish pranks on their employers; servant maids and sober apothecaries, out-at-elbow scriveners and stolid rustics, together with the rag and tag of soldiery, the paid mercenaries of Maurice of Nassau’s army, in their showy doublets and plumed bonnets, elbowing their way through with the air of masters.</p>
				<p>And all this brilliant gathering was lit by a pale, wintry sun: and with the sleepy waters of the Eem, and the frowning towers of the Koppel-poort forming just the right natural-tinted background to the scene.</p>
				<p>“Make way there!” the prince’s herald shouted, whilst another rang a fanfare upon the trumpet. “Make way for his High and Mightiness, Maurice of Nassau, Prince of Orange, Stadtholder of the United Provinces of Holland, Friesland, Utrecht, Gelderland, Over Yssel, and Groningen! Make way!”</p>
				<p>The equerries were bringing the prince’s charger, the pikemen followed in gorgeous padded trunks and slashed hose. To the noise of the moving throng, the chatter and the laughter, the scraping of viols and piping of sackbuts, was now added the din of champing horses, rattle of bits and chains, the shouts of the men who were bringing the horses along. The crowd receded, leaving an open space in front of the house, where mounted men assembled so quickly that they seemed as if they had risen out of the ground.</p>
				<p>The Stadtholder was taking final leave of his host listening with what patience he could master to lengthy, loyal speeches from the more important guests, and from the other bride and bridegroom. He had⁠—deliberately methinks⁠—turned his back on Diogenes, who, strangely enough, was booted and spurred too, had his sword buckled to his belt, and carried a dark cloak on his arm, presenting not at all the picture of a bridegroom in holiday attire.</p>
				<p>And it all happened so quickly that neither the guests within, nor the soldiers, nor the crowd outside, had time to realize it or to take it in. No one understood, in fact, what was happening, save perhaps the Stadtholder, who guessed; and he engaged the sober fathers near him in earnest conversation.</p>
				<p>A mounted equerry, dressed in rough leather jerkin and leading another horse by the bridle, had taken up his stand in the forefront of the crowd. Now at a signal unheard by all save him, he jumped out of the saddle and stood beside the stirrup leathers of the second charger. At that same instant Diogenes, with movements quick as lightning, had thrown the cloak, which he was carrying round Gilda’s shoulders, and before she could utter a scream or even a gasp, he had stooped and picked her up in his arms as if she were a weightless doll.</p>
				<p>Another second and he was outside the door, at the top of the steps which led down to the quay. For an instant he stood there, his keen eyes sweeping over the picture before him. Like a young lion that hath been caged and now scents liberty once more, he inhaled the biting air; a superb figure, with head tossed back, eyes and lips laughing with the joy of deliverance, the inert figure of the girl lying in his arms.</p>
				<p>He felt her clinging more closely to him, and revelled in that intoxicating sense of power when the one woman yields who holds a world of happiness in her tiny hand. He felt the tightening of her hold, watched the look of contentment stealing over her face, saw her eyes close, her lips smile, and knew that they were ready for a kiss.</p>
				<p>Then he caught sight of his horse, and of the man in the leather jerkin. He signalled to him to bring the horses near. The crowd understood his meaning and set up a ringing cheer. Many things had been seen in Dutch cities before, but never so romantic an abduction as this. The bridegroom carrying off his bride in the face of scandalized and protesting wedding guests! The Stadtholder even was seen to laugh. He could be seen in the background, reassuring the horrified guests, and trying by kind words and pressure of hand to appease Mynheer Beresteyn’s agonized surprise.</p>
				<p>“I knew of his mad project, and I must say I approved,” the prince whispered to the agitated father. “He is taking her to Rotterdam tonight. Let the child be, Mynheer; she is safe enough in his arms.”</p>
				<p>Beresteyn was one of those men who throughout his life had always known how to accept the inevitable. Perhaps in his heart he knew that the Stadtholder was right.</p>
				<p>“Give them your blessing, Mynheer,” Maurice of Nassau urged. “English gentleman or soldier of fortune, the man is a man and deserves it. Your daughter loves him. Let them be.”</p>
				<p>Diogenes had encountered Beresteyn’s reproachful glance. He did not move from where he stood, only his arms closed tighter still around Gilda’s motionless form. It was an instinctive challenge to the father⁠—almost a defiance. What he had he would hold, in spite of all.</p>
				<p>Beresteyn hesitated for the mere fraction of a second longer; then he, too, stepped out through the door and approached the man and his burden. He said nothing, but, in the face of the crowd, he stooped and pressed his lips against his daughter’s forehead. Then Mynheer Beresteyn murmured something which sounded like a blessing, and added solemnly:</p>
				<p>“May God’s wrath descend upon you, my lord, if you ever cause her unhappiness.”</p>
				<p>“Amen to that!” responded Diogenes lightly. “She and I, Mynheer, will dream together for awhile in England, but I’ll bring her back to you when our orchards are gay with apple-blossom and there is a taste of summer in the air.”</p>
				<p>He bowed his head to receive the father’s blessing. The crowd cheered again; sackbuts and viols set up a lively tune. At every window of the house, along the quay eager faces were peering out, gazing on the moving spectacle. In the doorway of Mynheer Beresteyn’s house the Stadtholder remained to watch. For the moment he seemed better and brighter, more like his former self. The rest of the bridal party was still in the hall, but the wedding guests had gone back into the banqueting-room, whence they could see through the open windows what was going on.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-2-7" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>Then it was that suddenly a curious spectacle presented itself to view. It was, in truth, so curious an one that those of the crowd who were in the rear withdrew their consideration from the romantic scene before them in order to concentrate it on those two strange-looking cavaliers who had just emerged from under the Koppel-port, and were slowly forging their way through the throng.</p>
				<p>It was the ringing shout, reiterated twice in succession by one of these cavaliers, that had at first arrested the attention of the crowd, and had even caused Diogenes to pause in the very act of starting for his sentimental adventure. To him the voice that uttered such peremptory clamour was familiar enough, but what in <abbr>St.</abbr> Bavon’s name did it all mean?</p>
				<p>“<i xml:lang="nl">Hola!</i> you <i xml:lang="nl">verdommte plepshurk</i>!” came for the third time from the strange cavalier. “Make way there! We are for the house of Mynheer Beresteyn, where we are bidden as his guests.”</p>
				<p>A loud burst of hilarity greeted this announcement, and a mocking voice retorted lustily:</p>
				<p>“Hey! Make way there for the honoured guests of Mynheer Beresteyn!”</p>
				<p>In truth, it was small wonder that the aspect of these two cavaliers caused such wild jollity amongst the people, who at this precise moment were overready for laughter. One of them, as lean as a gatepost, sat high on his horse with long shanks covered in high leathern boots. A tall sugar-loaf hat sat precariously upon his head, and his hatchet face, with the hooked, prominent nose and sharp, unshaved chin, looked blue with the cold.</p>
				<p>Behind him on a pillion rode⁠—or rather clung⁠—his companion, a short man as rotund as the other was lean, with round face which no doubt had once been of a healthy ruddy tint, but was now streaked and blotched with pallor. He, too, wore a sugar-loaf hat, but it had slid down to the back of his head, and was held in place by a piece of black tape, which he had in his mouth like a horse has its bit. He was holding on very tightly with his short, fat arms to his companion’s body, and his feet were tied together with thick cord beneath the horse’s belly. His doublet and hose were smeared with mud and stained with blood, and altogether he presented a pitiable spectacle, more especially when he rolled his small, beady eyes and looked with a scared expression on the hilarious apprentices who were dancing and screaming around him.</p>
				<p>But the other appeared quite indifferent to the jeers and mockeries of the crowd. He passed majestically through the gateway of the Koppel-poort that spans the river, not unlike the figure of that legendary knight of the rueful countenance of whom the Señor Cervantes had been writing of late.</p>
				<p>Diogenes had remained on the top of the steps, perfectly still. His keen eyes, frowning now under the straight, square brow, watched the slow progress of those two quaint figures. Who will ever attempt to explain the subtle workings of that mysterious force which men term Intuition? Whence does it come? Where does it dwell? How doth it come knocking at a man’s heart with cold, hard knuckles that bruise and freeze? Diogenes felt that sudden call. Gilda was still lying snugly in his arms; she had seen nothing. But he had become suspicious now, mistrustful of that Fate which had but a moment ago smiled so encourageingly upon him. All his exhilaration fell away from him like a discarded mantle, leaving him chilled to the soul and inert, and with the premonition of something evil looming from afar on the horizon of his Destiny.</p>
				<p>The two quaint companions came nearer. Soon Diogenes could read every line upon the familiar countenances. He and those men had fought side by side, shoulder to shoulder, had bled together, suffered together, starved and triumphed together. There was but little the one thought that the others could not know. Even now, on Socrates’ lean, lantern-jawed face Diogenes read plainly the message of some tragedy as yet uncomprehended by the other, but which Pythagoras’ sorry plight had more that suggested. It was a deeper thing than Intuition; it was Knowledge. Knowledge that the hour of happiness had gone by, the hour of security and of repose, and that the relentless finger of Fate pointed once more to paths beset with sorrow and with thorns, to the path of an adventurer and of a soldier of fortune, rather than to the easy existence of a wealthy gentleman.</p>
				<p>As Socrates swung himself wearily out of the saddle, Diogenes’ piercing glance darted a mute, quick query toward his friend. The other replied by a mere nod of the head. They knew; they understood one another. Put into plain language, question and answer might have been put thus:</p>
				<p>“Are we to go on the warpath again, old compeer?”</p>
				<p>“So it seems. There’s fighting to be done. Will you be in it, too?”</p>
				<p>And Diogenes gave that quick impatient sigh which was so characteristic of him, and very slowly, very gently, as if she were a sheaf of flowers, he allowed his beloved to glide out of his arms.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
