<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV: Adder’s Fork</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Adder’s Fork</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="chapter-4-1" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>Nicolaes Beresteyn accompanied his brother-in-law during the first part of the journey. He had insisted on this, despite Diogenes’ preference for solitude. There was not much comradeship lost between the two men. Though the events of that memorable New Years Day, distant less than three months, were ostensibly consigned to oblivion, nevertheless, the bitter humiliation which Nicolaes had suffered at the hands of the then nameless soldier of fortune still rankled in his heart. Since then so many things had come to light which, to an impartial observer, more than explained Gilda Beresteyn’s love for the stranger, and Mynheer her father’s acquiescence in an union based on respect for so brave a man.</p>
				<p>But Nicolaes had held aloof from the intimacy, and soon his own courtship of the wealthy Kaatje gave him every reason for withdrawing more and more from his own family circle. But tonight, after the tempestuous close of what should have been a merely conventional day, he sought Diogenes’ company in a way he had never done before.</p>
				<p>“Like you,” he said, “I am wearied and sick with all this mummery. A couple of hours on the Veluwe will set me more in tune with life.”</p>
				<p>Diogenes chaffed him not a little.</p>
				<p>“The lovely Kaatje will pout,” he suggested, “and rightly, too. You have no excuse for absenting yourself from her side at this hour.”</p>
				<p>“I’ll come with you as far as Barneveld,” Nicolaes insisted. “A matter of less than a couple of hours’ ride. It will do me good. And Kaatje is still closeted with her garrulous mother.”</p>
				<p>“You think it will do her good to be kept waiting,” Diogenes retorted with good-natured sarcasm. “Well, come, if you have a mind. But I’ll not have your company further than Barneveld. I am used to the Veluwe, and intend taking a shortcut over the upland, through which I would not care to take a companion less well acquainted with the waste than I.”</p>
				<p>Thus it was decided. Already the Stadtholder had gone with his numerous retinue, with his bodyguard and his pike-men and with his equerries, and those of the wedding-party who had come in his train from Utrecht, friends of Mynheer Beresteyn, who had ridden over for the most part with wife or daughter pillioned behind them, and all glad to avail themselves of the protection of his Highness’s escort against highway marauders, none too scarce in these parts. Torchbearers and linkmen completed the imposing cavalcade, for the night would be moonless, and the tracks across the moorland none too clearly defined.</p>
				<p>Diogenes had waited with what patience he could muster until the last of the numerous train had defiled under the Koppel-poort. Then he, too, got to horse. Despite Socrates’ many protestations, he was not allowed to accompany him.</p>
				<p>“You must look after Pythagoras,” was Diogenes’ final word on the subject.</p>
				<p>“ ’Tis the first time,” the other answered moodily, “that you go on such an adventure without us. Take care, comrade! The Veluwe is wide and lonely. That swag-bellied oaf up there hath cause to rue his solitary wanderings on that <i xml:lang="nl">verfloekte</i> waste.”</p>
				<p>“I’ll be careful, old compeer,” Diogenes retorted with a smile. “But mine errand is not one on which I desire to draw unnecessary attention, and I can remain best unperceived if I am alone. ’Tis no adventure I am embarking on this night. Only a simple errand as far as Vorden, a matter of ten leagues at most.</p>
				<p>“And the whole of the <i xml:lang="nl">verdommte</i> Veluwe to traverse at dead of night!” the other muttered sullenly.</p>
				<p>“I know every corner of it,” Diogenes rejoined impatiently. “And it will not be the first time that I travel on it alone.”</p>
				<p>Thus Socrates was left grumbling, and anon Diogenes, accompanied by Nicolaes Beresteyn, started on his way.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-2" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>At first the two men spoke little. The air was still cold and very humid, and the thaw was persisting. The horses stepped out briskly on the soft, sandy earth.</p>
				<p>The distance between Amersfoort and Barneveld is but a couple of leagues. Within the hour the lights of the little city could be seen gleaming ahead. After a while Nicolaes Beresteyn became more loquacious, talked quite freely of the past.</p>
				<p>“My father no longer trusts me,” he said, with ill-concealed bitterness. “Did you see how he shut me out of the council-chamber?”</p>
				<p>“Yet the Stadtholder himself told you everything that occurred subsequently,” Diogenes retorted kindly, “including his own plans and mine errand at this hour. I think that your conscience troubles you unnecessarily, and you see a deliberate intention in every simple act.”</p>
				<p>“If I thought that my father still suspected me⁠—” Nicolaes mumbled under his breath.</p>
				<p>“And if he did, you could scarce blame him. ’Tis only in the future you can prove your true worth. And methinks,” he added, more seriously than he was usually wont to speak, “that you will have occasion to do this very soon.”</p>
				<p>“In the meanwhile, here’s Barneveld ahead of us,” Nicolaes rejoined, with a quick, indefinable sigh, and giving a sudden turn to the conversation. “I’ll see you across the city, then return to the bosom of my family, there to live in uxorious idleness, whilst you, a stranger, are entrusted with the destinies of our land. A poor outlook for a man who is young and a patriot, you’ll own.”</p>
				<p>To this Diogenes thought it best to make no reply. He knew well enough that the mistrust of which Nicolaes accused his father was a very real thing, and that it was indeed only time that would soften the proud burgher’s heart toward his only son. It was not likely that one who but a brief while ago had conspired against the Stadtholder’s life with that abominable Stoutenburg could be admitted readily into the councils of the very man whom he had plotted to assassinate. With every desire to forgive, it was but natural that Mynheer Beresteyn should fail entirely to forget.</p>
				<p>No more, however, was said upon the subject now, and Nicolaes soon relapsed into that sullen mood which had of late become habitual to him. Thus Diogenes was glad enough to be rid of his company. At Barneveld he obtained a fresh horse, left his own in charge of a man known to him, with orders to ride it quietly on the morrow as far as Wageningen, where he himself would pick it up a couple of days later. His journey would now lie due east to Zutphen. There he meant to make a halt of a few hours, and thence proceed to Vorden, where Marquet was in camp, with four thousand seasoned troops, trained under Mansfeld, and rested now since the campaign in Groningen.</p>
				<p>The Stadtholder’s orders were that the general proceed, at once to Arnheim, ere the forces of the Archduchess had time to cross the Ijssel, and to cut off all access to so important a city.</p>
				<p>From Vorden to Wageningen, which lies due south form Barneveld, the journey would be a long one, and, with De Berg’s army so near, might even prove perilous. But De Keysere was at Wageningen, with three thousand troops and some artillery. His help would be of immense service to Nijmegen if the latter city, too, were to be attacked.</p>
				<p>“How will you journey from Vorden to Wageningen?” Nicolaes asked Diogenes in the end. “You will have to avoid the Ijssel.”</p>
				<p>“I’ll cut across to Lang Soeren,” the other replied; “and thence go to Ede.”</p>
				<p>“There’s scarce a track on the Veluwe just there,” the other urged.</p>
				<p>“Such as there is, I know,” Diogenes retorted curtly. “And I must trust to luck.”</p>
				<p>They had brought their horses to a halt about a quarter of a league outside Barneveld, where the two men decided to part. The stretch of the great waste, with its undulating, barren hills, and narrow, scarce visible tracks, lay straight out before them. Diogenes was sniffing the frosty air out toward the east, where lay Vorden, and whence there came to his nostrils the sharp tang of the breeze, that cut like a knife. The thaw which had held sway in the cities and on the low-lying lands had been vanquished ere it reached the arid upland. The snow upon the Veluwe lay as even and as pure as before. Above, a canopy of stars seemed but a diamond-studded veil of mysterious indigo, stretched over a world of light, which it failed altogether to dim. The silence and desolation were absolute; but not so the darkness. To the keen eye of the adventurer, accustomed to loneliness, the vast stretches of open country and limitless horizons, there was no such thing as absolute darkness. He could perceive the slightest accidental upon the smooth carpet of snow, noted every tiny mound that marked a clump of rough shrub or grass, and every footmark of beast or bird, mere flecks of blue upon the virgin pall.</p>
				<p>“Such track as there is, I know,” he had carelessly asserted awhile ago, in response to a warning from Nicolaes. And now, without an instant’s hesitation, and tossing to the other a last curt word of farewell, he gave his horse a slight taste of the spur, and soon became a mere speck upon the illimitable waste.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-3" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>It was close on midnight when, weary, saddle-sore, his boots covered in half-melted snow, Mynheer Nicolaes Beresteyn demanded admittance into his native city.</p>
				<p>At first the guard at the Koppel-poort, roused from his slumbers, refused to recognize in the belated traveler the bridegroom of a few hours ago. Had anyone ever heard, I ask you, of a bridegroom absenting himself on the very night of his nuptial until so late an hour? And then returning in a mood that was so irascible and inconsequent that the sergeant in command of the gate was on the point of ordering his detention in the guardroom, pending investigation and the orders of the burgomaster, whose decision on such points was final? But since the burgomaster happened to be Mynheer Beresteyn, and as the weary and pugnacious traveler did, in truth, appear to be his only son⁠—why, it was perhaps best on the whole to take the matter as a joke, and not to say too much about it. The sergeant did, indeed, as Nicolaes was finally allowed to ride over the bridge, essay one or two of the most time-honoured witticisms at the expense of the belated bridegroom; but Mynheer Nicolaes was clearly in no mood for chaff, and when he had passed by, the sergeant and one or two of the men, who had witnessed his strangely sullen mood, shook their heads in ominous prognostication of sundry matrimonial difficulties to come.</p>
				<p>The house on the quay, plainly visible from the Koppel-poort, was dark enough to suggest that every one of its inmates was already abed. Nicolaes, however, did not ride up to the front door; but, after he had crossed the bridge, he went straight on through one or two narrow streets which lay at the back of his home until he reached the corner of the Korte Gracht, which, again, abuts on the quay. Thus he had gone round in a semicircle, in obvious avoidance of the paternal house, and now he brought his horse to a halt outside a tall and narrow door which was surmounted by a lantern let into the wall. A painted sign which hung from an iron bracket above the door indicated to the passing wayfarer that the place was one where rider and horse could find food and shelter.</p>
				<p>Nicolaes dismounted, and going up to the door, he knocked against it with the point of his foot. This he had to do several times before the welcome sound of someone moving inside the house came to his ear. A moment or two later the door was opened cautiously. A man appeared on the threshold, wrapped in a night-robe and still wearing a night-bonnet on his head.</p>
				<p>“Is that you, mynheer?” he queried drowsily.</p>
				<p>“Who else should it be, you loon?” Nicolaes replied irritably. “Here’s your horse,” he added, and without waiting for further commend or protest from the unfortunate landlord thus roused from his slumbers, he proceeded to tether the animal by the reins to one of the iron rings in the wall.</p>
				<p>“It is so late, mynheer,” the man protested dolefully; “and so cold. Will you not take the horse round to the stable yourself? It is but a step to the right, and there’s the gate⁠—”</p>
				<p>“It is late, as you say, and cold,” Nicolaes retorted curtly. “And when I paid you so liberally for the horse, I did not bargain to take service with you as ostler in the middle of the night.”</p>
				<p>“But, mynheer⁠—” urged the landlord, still protesting.</p>
				<p>But Nicolaes did not listen. In faith, he had ceased to hear, for already he was striding rapidly down the Korte Gracht, and the next moment was back on the quay. A few steps brought him to the door of his father’s house. Here he paused for a moment ere he mounted the stone steps that led up to the massive front door, stamped his feet so as to shake the melted snow from his boots, and with a few quick touches tried to reestablish some semblance of order in his clothes. Indeed, when presently he rapped vigorously with the iron knocker against the door, he looked no longer like a wearied and querulous traveler, but rather like a man just returned from a short and pleasant ride.</p>
				<p>To his astonishment it was Maria, his sister Gilda’s faithful tire-woman, who opened the door for him. She anticipated his very first query by a curt:</p>
				<p>“Everyone is abed. The <span xml:lang="nl">jongejuffrouw</span> alone chose to wait for you, and I could not let her wait alone.”</p>
				<p>Nicolaes uttered an angry exclamation.</p>
				<p>“Tell my sister to go to bed, too,” he commanded briefly. “I’ll go to my rooms at once, as it is so late.”</p>
				<p>Maria made no audible reply. She mumbled something about “Shameful conduct!” and “Wedding-night!” But Nicolaes paid no heed, strode quickly across the hall, and ran swiftly up the stairs.</p>
				<p>But on the landing he came abruptly to a halt. He had almost fallen against his sister Gilda, who stood there waiting for him.</p>
				<p>Behind her, a little way down the passage, a door stood ajar, and through it there came a narrow fillet of light. At sight of him, and before he could utter a sound, she put a finger to her lip, then let the way along the passage. The door which stood ajar was the one which gave on her own room. She went in, and he followed her, his heart beating with something like shame or fear.</p>
				<p>“Hush!” she whispered, and gently closed the door behind him. “Make no noise! Kaatje has at last sobbed herself to sleep. She hath been put to bed in her mother’s room. ’Twere a shame to disturb her.” Then, as Nicolaes muttered something that sounded very like a curse, the girl added reproachfully: “Poor Kaatje! You have shown very little ardour toward her, Klaas.”</p>
				<p>“I lost my way in the dark,” he answered. “I had no thought it could be so late.”</p>
				<p>Just then the tower clock of <abbr>St.</abbr> Maria Kerk chimed the midnight hour.</p>
				<p>Gilda hazarded timidly: “You should not have thought of accompanying my lord. He was ready to start out alone; and your place, Klaas, was beside your wife!”</p>
				<p>“Are you going to lecture me about my duty, Gilda?” he said irritably. “You must not think that because⁠—”</p>
				<p>“I think nothing,” she broke in simply, “save that Kaatje wept when the evening wore on and you did not return; and that the more she wept the greater was our father’s anger against you.”</p>
				<p>“He knew that I meant to accompany your husband a part of the way,” Nicolaes retorted. “In truth, had he done me the justice to read my thoughts, he himself would have bade me go.”</p>
				<p>“It was kind of you,” she rejoined somewhat coolly, “to be concerned as to my lord’s safety. But I can assure you⁠—”</p>
				<p>“ ’Twas not concern for <em>his</em> safety,” he broke in gruffly, “that caused me to accompany him tonight.”</p>
				<p>“What then?”</p>
				<p>But he gave no reply, but his lip and turned away from her, with the air of one who fears that he hath said too much and cares not to be questioned again.</p>
				<p>“I’d best go now,” he said abruptly.</p>
				<p>He looked around for his gloves, which he had thrown down upon the table. His manner seemed so strange that Gilda was suddenly conscious of a nameless kind of fear; the sort of premonition that comes to highly sensitive natures, at times when hitherto unsuspected danger suddenly looms upon the cloudless sky of life. She forced him to return her searching glance.</p>
				<p>“You are hiding something from me, Klaas,” she said determinedly. “What is it?”</p>
				<p>“I?” he riposted, feigning surprise. “Hiding something? Why should I have something to hide?”</p>
				<p>“That I know not,” she replied. “But there was some hidden meaning in your words just now when you said that ’twas not concern for my lord’s safety that caused you to accompany him this night. What, then, was it?” she insisted, seeing that he remained silent, even though he met her gaze with a look that appeared both fearful and pitying.</p>
				<p>She had her back to the door now, looked like some timid creature brought to bay by a cruel and hitherto unsuspected enemy.</p>
				<p>“You must not ask me for my meaning, Gilda,” Nicolaes said at last. “There are things which concern men only, and with which women should have no part.”</p>
				<p>His tone of ill-concealed compassion stung her like a cut from a whip across the face.</p>
				<p>“There is nothing that concerns my lord,” she retorted proudly, “in which he would not desire me to bear my part.”</p>
				<p>“Then let him tell you himself.”</p>
				<p>“What?”</p>
				<p>She threw the question at him like a challenge, stepped up to him and seized him by the wrist⁠—no longer a timid creature at bay. But a strong, determined woman, who feels in some mysterious way that the man whom she loves is being attacked, and who is prepared, with every known and unknown weapon almighty love can suggest, to defend him, his life or his honour, or both.</p>
				<p>“You are not going out of this room, Klaas, until you have explained!” she said with unquestionable determination. “What is it that my lord should tell me himself?”</p>
				<p>“Why he, newly wed and a stranger, was so determined on this, his wedding night, to carry the Stadtholder’s message across the Veluwe.”</p>
				<p>Nicolaes spoke abruptly, almost fiercely now, as if wearied of this wrangling, and burdened with a secret he could no longer hold. But she did not at first understand his meaning.</p>
				<p>“I do not understand what you mean,” she murmured vaguely, a perplexed frown between her eyes.</p>
				<p>“There were plenty there eager and willing to go,” Nicolaes went on roughly. “Nay, the errand was not in itself perilous. Speed was required, yes; and a sound knowledge of the country. But a dozen men at least who were in this house today know the Veluwe as well as this stranger, and any good horse would cover the ground fast enough. But he wanted to go⁠—he, this man whom none of us know, who was married this day, and whose bride had the first call on his attention. He insisted with the Stadtholder, and he went⁠—And I went with him; would have gone all the way if he had not forced me to go back. Why did he wish to go, Gilda? Why did he leave you deliberately this night? Think! Think! And why did he insist on going alone, with not even one of those besotted boon companions of his to share in his adventure? A message to Marquet⁠—my God!” he added with a sneer. “A message to the Archduchess, more like, to cross the Ijssel ere it be too late!”</p>
				<p>“You devil!”</p>
				<p>She hissed out the words through set lips and teeth clenched in an access of fierce and overwhelming passion. And before he could recover himself, before he could guess her purpose, she had seized his heavy, leathern gloves, which were lying on the table, and struck him with them full in the face. He staggered, and put his hand up to his eyes.</p>
				<p>“Go!” she commanded briefly.</p>
				<p>He tried to laugh the situation off, said almost flippantly:</p>
				<p>“I’ll punish you for this, you young vixen!”</p>
				<p>But she did not move, and her glance seemed to freeze the words upon his lips.</p>
				<p>“Go!” she commanded once more.</p>
				<p>He shrugged his shoulders.</p>
				<p>“I understand your indignation, Gilda. Nay, I honour it. But remember my warning! Your stranger lord,” he went on with slow and deliberate emphasis, “will be returning anon to the Stadtholder’s camp, a courted and honoured man; but ’tis the armies of the Archduchess who will have crossed the Ijssel by then, whilst the orders to Marquet will have reached that commander too late.”</p>
				<p>Then he turned on his heel and went out of the room, and anon Gilda heard his footstep resounding along the passage. She listened until she heard the opening and closing of a distant door, after which she sighed and murmured, “Poor Kaatje!” That was all; but there was a world of meaning in the sorrowful compassion wherewith she said those words.</p>
				<p>Then she raised her left hand, round the third finger of which glittered a plain gold ring. The ring she pressed long and lingeringly against her lips, and in her heart she prayed, “God guard you, my dear lord!”</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
