<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Nest of Scorpions</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="chapter-6-1" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>Of the extraordinary events which threatened to make March 21, 1624, one of the most momentous dates in the history of the Netherlands we have not much in the way of detail. The broad facts we know chiefly through Van Aitzema’s ponderous and minute “Saken <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. Staet,” whilst De Voocht was, of course, a friend of the Beresteyn family, and, as I understand it, was present in the house at Amersfoort when the terrible catastrophe was so auspiciously and mysteriously averted.</p>
				<p>The one thing, however, which neither he nor Van Aitzema have made quite clear is the motive which prompted the Stadtholder to go to Amersfoort in person. He had quite a number of knights and gentlemen around him whom he could have fully trusted to take even so portentous a message and such explicit orders as he desired to send. De Voocht, indeed, suggests that it was Nicolaes Beresteyn who persuaded him, urging the obstinacy of his father, the burgomaster, and of the burghers of the city, who had steadily opposed the Stadtholder’s wishes when he⁠—Nicolaes⁠—had been sent to convey them.</p>
				<p>Nicolaes Beresteyn had joined his sovereign lord at the camp at Utrecht a couple of days after his wedding. Wearied of sentimental dalliance with the stolid Kaatje, he was glad enough that his duty demanded his presence in camp rather than in the vicinity of his young wife’s apron-strings.</p>
				<p>It was but natural that, when the Stadtholder desired to send orders to Amersfoort, he should do so through the intermediary of Nicolaes. But on that day, which was March 20, the young man returned, vowing that these were not being obeyed; not a matter of disloyalty, of course, just of tenacity. Civic dignitaries, conscious of their worth and of the sacrifices they had made in the common cause, were wont to wax obstinate where the affairs of their own cities were concerned. But, on the other hand, resistance to his will had invariably the effect of rousing the Stadtholder’s arbitrary temper to a point of unreasoning anger. Olden Barneveldt had expiated his contumacy on the scaffold, and I doubt not that, when Nicolaes returned from Amersfoort that evening and delivered his report, the fate of even so trusted a councillor as Mynheer Beresteyn hung for awhile in the balance.</p>
				<p>That the matter was one of supreme importance it were impossible to doubt. Maurice of Nassau would not lightly have left his camp at Utrecht that day. The forces of the Archduchess Isabella, who, under the leadership of De Berg and of Isembourg, were threatening Gelderland from two sides, had succeeded on the one part in crossing the Ijssel. His own army was threatened by that of Spinola from the south. On the other hand, the messenger whom he had sent across the Veluwe to urge Marquet and De Keysere to concentrate inside Arnheim and Nijmegen had not yet returned. Nevertheless, he chose, by this suddenly planned excursion to Amersfoort, to expose his valuable person to serious danger; a fact which subsequent events proved only too conclusively.</p>
				<p>Nicolaes Beresteyn was sent back at dawn the following morning to warn the burgomaster of the Stadtholder’s coming, and enjoining the strictest secrecy. The young man was under orders to say nothing beyond that fact. When closely questioned, however, by his father and also by others, he did admit that fugitives from Ede had succeeded in reaching the camp.</p>
				<p>Fugitives from Ede? What did that mean? Why should there be fugitives from Ede, when the armies of the Archduchess were so many leagues away?</p>
				<p>Nicolaes Beresteyn shrugged his shoulders. “The Stadtholder will explain,” was all that he said.</p>
				<p>He appeared impatient and consequential, made them all feel that he could say more if he cared. He had been kept out of the prince’s councils while he was under the paternal room, but now he had gained a place in the camp which had always been his by right. These solemn burghers⁠—important enough within the purlieus of their own city⁠—had become insignificant, mere civilians, now that the fate of the country rested upon those who were young enough to bear arms.</p>
				<p>Nicolaes tried to meet his sister’s glance.</p>
				<p>Her indifference toward him galled his sense of importance, and he wished her to know that he neither repented nor was ashamed of what he had said the other night. Anon, when he had succeeded in forcing her eyes to meet his, he gave her a look charged with a mocking challenge. Up to this hour, she had said nothing to her father; now Nicolaes appeared to dare her to speak. But his sneers had not the power to disturb her sublime trust in the man she loved. That some mystery did cling to his journey across the Veluwe she could no longer doubt; but her fears upon the subject dwelt solely on any personal danger that might have overtaken him.</p>
				<p>As for her father and his friends, they had apparently decided to possess their souls in patience. There was, indeed, nothing to do but to wait the Stadtholder’s arrival, and in the meanwhile to try and hold those fears in check which had been aroused by the ominous words, “Fugitives from Ede.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-6-1" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">2</h3>
				<p>The Stadtholder arrived in the course of the morning. Mynheer Beresteyn did not receive him on the doorstep, as he would have done had the visit been an open one. As it was, the passers-by on the busy quay did not bestow more than a passing glance on the plainly clad cavalier who swung himself out of the saddle outside the burgomaster’s house. A message from the camp, probably, they thought. Mynheer Nicolaes had been backward and forward from Utrecht several times these past two or three days. The burgomaster awaited his exalted guest in the hall. His attitude and the expression of his face were alike pregnant with eager questionings. The Stadtholder gave curt acknowledgement to the greetings of Mynheer Beresteyn, of his family, and of his friends, and then strode deliberately into the banqueting-hall.</p>
				<p>It looked vast and deserted at this early hour of a winter’s morning. Nothing of the animation, the riotous gaiety of that day, less that a week ago, seemed to linger in its sombre, panelled walls. The daïs upon which the brides and bridegrooms and the wedding party had sat, and which had crowned so brilliant a spectacle, had been removed, and the magnificent gold and silver plate, the fine linens and priceless crystals been carefully stowed away. Serving-men and sweepers were busy airing and dusting the room when the door was thrown open, and His Highness came in, ushered in by his host. They fled at sight of these great gentlemen, like so many rabbits into carefully hidden burrows.</p>
				<p>The Stadtholder went up to the long centre table and faced Mynheer Beresteyn and those who had come in with him⁠—the members of his family and half a dozen burghers, men of importance in the little city. Every one could see that His Highness’s anger was bitter against them all. “And so, mynheer,” he began curtly, and in tones of marked irritation, and addressing himself more particularly to the burgomaster, “you have thought fit to defy my orders.”</p>
				<p>“Your Highness!” protested Mynheer Beresteyn.</p>
				<p>“Yet they were clear enough,” the Stadtholder went on, not heeding the interruption. “Or did your son Nicolaes fail to explain?”</p>
				<p>“He told us, your Highness, that it was feared the armies of the Archduchess had crossed the Ijssel⁠—”</p>
				<p>“The armies of the Archduchess crossed the Ijssel three days ago,” Maurice of Nassau broke in impatiently. “Since then they have overrun Gelderland and occupied Ede, putting that city to fire and sword.”</p>
				<p>There came a sound like the catching of breath, the rise of a gasp of horror and anguish in every one’s throat. But it was quickly suppressed, and His Highness was listened to in silence until the end. Even now, when he paused, no one spoke. All eyes were cast to the ground in self-centered meditation. The whole thing had come as a thunderbolt out of a cloudless sky. Ede had always seemed so safe, so remote. A little city which led nowhere save to the Zuyder Zee, and in the very heart of the United Provinces. What could be the motive of the Archduchess’s commanders to adventure thus far into a country which was so universally hostile to them, even to the most miserable peasant, who would pollute every well and stream rather than see the enemy overrun the land?</p>
				<p>But all these men⁠—ay, and the women, too⁠—had seen so much, suffered so much; fire and sword were such familiar dangers before their eyes, that for them the time had gone when sighs and lamentations would ease their overburdened hearts. They had learned to receive every fresh blow from God’s hands in silence, but with determination to fight on, to fight again and to the death once more, if need be, for their liberties, their rights, and the welfare of their children. It was indeed Mynheer Beresteyn who took the next words out of the Stadtholder’s mouth.</p>
				<p>“Then Amersfoort, too, is threatened?” he said simply.</p>
				<p>The prince nodded.</p>
				<p>“Think you,” he retorted, “that I would have ordered the evacuation of the town had there not been imperative necessity for such a course? Now, you may pray God that your wilful disobedience hath not placed your city in jeopardy.”</p>
				<p>“ ’Twas but yesterday we had the order,” one of the burghers urged. “And⁠—”</p>
				<p>“ ’Twas yesterday it should have been obeyed,” the Stadtholder broke in roughly. “You would then have saved me a perilous journey, for the country already is infested with spies and vedettes, outposts of the Spanish armies.”</p>
				<p>“We are all ready to guard your Highness with our lives,” the burgomaster said quietly.</p>
				<p>“ ’Tis your wits I want, mynheer,” the prince riposted dryly, “not your blood. Indeed, I do fear that Amersfoort is threatened, though I know not if De Berg will spend his forces on you, or, rather, concentrate them on Arnheim. But you must be prepared,” he added with stern emphasis.</p>
				<p>“You are not in a position to defend yourselves, and I cannot detach any of my troops to come to your assistance if you are attacked. Therefore, my orders were: ‘Evacuate the town.’ You, mynheer burgomaster, must issue your proclamation at once. Let every one go who can, taking women and children with them. Those who remain do so at their risk. Some of you can go north to Amsterdam, others west to Utrecht. Let De Berg find an empty shell when he comes.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-6-1" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">3</h3>
				<p>Only those who had ever had the sorry task of abandoning a home in the face of an advancing enemy can have any conception of what this peremptory order meant to these burghers⁠—fathers of families for the most part, who after the terrible privations which they had suffered for over half a century, had begun but a few years ago to reconstitute their country and their homes, to resume their interrupted industries, their commerce, their splendid art, to re-establish the wealth and power which had been their birthright, and which the tyranny of a bigoted and jealous overlord had wilfully wrested from them.</p>
				<p>Now it meant laying aside spindles and looms once again, lathes, chisels, or books, in order to buckle on swords which threatened to rust in their scabbards, and to don steel helmets. It meant leaving the women to weep, the children fatherless.</p>
				<p>Anxious eyes searched the Stadtholder’s drawn, moody face; more than one mind reverted to memories of this peerless and fearless commander, the hero of Turnhout and Ostend. Would he have spoken in those days of “evacuation” and of “helplessness”? Would he have dreaded Spinola or the hosts of the Archduchess?</p>
				<p>Ah, that subtle, insidious disease had indeed done its work! What mysterious poison was it that had shaken this great man’s nerve, made him gloomy and fretful, weakened that indomitable will which had once made the tyrant of Madrid quake for the future of his kingdom?</p>
				<p>“De Berg would not dare⁠—” one of the burghers hazarded timidly.</p>
				<p>“He may not,” His Highness answered. “In which case it might be safe for you all to return to your homes a few days hence. But some of those who fled from Ede believe that De Berg intends to detach some of his troops and with them push on as far as the Zuyder Zee, leaving it to others to join Isembourg, who is coming up from Kleve, and with his help capture Nijmegen first and then Arnheim.”</p>
				<p>“Marquet by now,” observed Beresteyn, “must be well on the way to Arnheim, and De Keysere close to Nijmegen. They can intercept Isembourg and cut him off from Ede and De Berg. Your Highness’s messenger⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Our messenger,” the prince broke in curtly, “failed to deliver our messages. Marquet is <em>not</em> on his way to Arnheim, and De Keysere was still at Wageningen when the first fugitives from Ede ran terror-stricken into our camp.”</p>
				<p>The words were scarce out of his mouth when the sound of a low, quickly suppressed cry came from the rear of the little group that had gathered around His Highness. Few heard it, or guessed whence it had come. Only Mynheer Beresteyn, turning swiftly, caught his daughter’s eyes fixed with a set expression upon him. With an almost imperceptible glance he beckoned to her, and she pushed her way through to his side, and slid her cold little hand into his firm grasp. Encouraged by her father’s nearness, it was Gilda who uttered the word of protest which had risen to more than one pair of lips.</p>
				<p>“Impossible, your Highness!” she said resolutely.</p>
				<p>“Impossible!” Maurice of Nassau retorted curtly. “Why impossible, <span xml:lang="nl">mejuffrouw</span>?”</p>
				<p>“Because my lord is a brave man, as full of resource as he is of courage. He undertook to deliver your Highness’s commands to Messire Marquet and Mynheer de Keysere. He is not a man to fail.”</p>
				<p>She looked brave and determined, without a trace of self-consciousness, even though the rigid education meted out to girls in these times forbade their raising a voice in the councils of their lords. But in this case she had been voicing what was in more than one mind, and when she looked around her with a kind of timid defiance, she only encountered kindly glances.</p>
				<p>Her father pressed her hand in tender encouragement. The Stadtholder himself appeared gracious and indulgent. It was only her brother’s gaze that was unendurable, for it was charged with sarcasm, not unmixed with malevolence. Did Nicolaes hate her, then? A sickening sense of horror filled the poor girl’s soul at the thought. Klaas, her little brother, whom she had loved and mothered, though he was her elder.</p>
				<p>Ofttimes had she stood between his childish peccadillos and his father’s wrath. And now⁠—she could not even bear to meet his glance. She knew that he triumphed, and that he rejoiced in his triumph, even though he must know that she was wounded to the quick. His warning was ringing in her ear, his warning which had, in truth, proved prophetic: “The orders to Marquet will reach that commander too late!”</p>
				<p>As in a dream, she listened to the Stadtholder’s words. The whole situation appeared unreal⁠—impossible.</p>
				<p>“Your defense of your husband,” the prince was saying, “does you honour, <span xml:lang="nl">mejuffrouw</span>. But this is not a time for sentiment, but for facts. And these it is our duty to face. We placed our every hope on Marquet’s co-operation, but Arnheim and Nijmegen are in peril at this hour because certain messages which I sent failed to reach their destination. We have not the leisure to discuss the causes of this failure; rather must we take immediate measures for the safety of our subjects here.”</p>
				<p>Gilda perforce had to remain silent. To the others, in fact, the matter was only important, in so far that the messenger’s failure to arrive had placed Arnheim and Nijmegen in jeopardy. What cared they for her heart-breaking anxiety on account of her beloved?</p>
				<p>She looked up at her father, because from him she could always expect sympathy. But he, too, was over-preoccupied just now; patted her hand gently, then let it go, absorbed as he was in listening to the Stadtholder’s orders for the speedy evacuation of Amersfoort.</p>
				<p>She turned away with a bitter sigh, all the more resolutely suppressed as her brother’s mocking glance followed her every movement. The men now were in close conference, the Stadtholder sitting at the table, the burgomaster beside him, with pen and ink, drafting the necessary proclamation, the others grouped around, discussing and tendering advice. Every one was busy, every one had something to think about.</p>
				<p>Gilda, heavy-hearted, took the opportunity of slipping unseen out of the room.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-6-1" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">4</h3>
				<p>What prompted her to run up to the very top of the house, like some stricken bird seeking an eyrie, she could not herself have told you. There is such a thing as instinct, and instinct takes innumerable forms according to the most pressing needs of the heart. For the moment, Gilda’s most pressing need was a sight of her beloved. Quite apart from the importance of his presence now with news from the threatened cities, she longed to see him, to feel his arms round her, to warm her starved soul in the sunshine of his love and his never absent smile. This longing it was that drove her up to the attic chambers, under the apex of the roof; for these chambers had tiny dormer windows which commanded extensive views of the countryside far beyond the ramparts and beyond the Eem.</p>
				<p>Gilda wandered into one of the attic chambers and threw open the narrow casements that gave on the back of the house. Leaning against the window frame, she looked out over the river and beyond it into the mist-laden distance. The sharp, humid air did her good, with its savour of the sea and the tang of spring already lurking in the atmosphere. The sea-fog which had hung over the country for some days still made a dense white veil that enveloped all the life that lay beyond the ramparts, and gave to the little city a strange air of isolation, as if the very world ended on the other side of its walls. From where Gilda stood, high above a forest of roofs and gables, she could see the picturesque fortifications, the monumental gates and turrets, and the Joris Poort and Nieuwpoort, which spanned the Eem on this side. Far away on her right was Utrecht; on her left Barneveld, beyond which stretched the arid upland which held in its cruel breast the secret of her husband’s fate.</p>
				<p>The girl felt inexpressibly alone, weighted with that sense of forlornness from which only the young are wont to suffer. With the years there comes a more complete self-sufficiency, a greater desire for solitude. Gregariousness is essentially the attribute of youth. And Gilda had no one in whom she could confide. Her father, in truth, had been all to her that a mother might have been; but just now the girl was pining for one of her own sex, for some one who would not be busy with many things, with politics and wars and dissensions, but whose breast would be warm and soft to pillow a head that was weary.</p>
				<p>The tears gathered in Gilda’s eyes and fell unheeded down her cheeks. It seemed to her as if every moment now she must see a rider galloping swiftly toward her as if she must hear that merry laugh ringing right across the marshland. But all that she saw was the sleepy little city, stretching out before her until it seemed to melt and merge in the arms of the mist; the network of narrow streets, the crow’s foot gables, the dormer windows and ornamental corbellings; and, above everything, the tower of <abbr>St.</abbr> Maria and <abbr>St.</abbr> Joris, with quaint market-place alive with people that looked like ants, fussy and minute.</p>
				<p>Even as she gazed, wide-eyed and tearful, the bell of <abbr>St.</abbr> Maria began to toll. The slow monotonous reverberation seemed in itself a presage of evil. From the height, Gilda could see the human ants pause awhile in their activities. Their very attitude, the grouping of individual figures, a kind of arrested action in the entire life of the town, proclaiming brooding terror. A moment or two later the sharp clang of the town-crier’s bell mingled with the majestic booming, and people started to run toward the market-place from every direction.</p>
				<p>Gilda watched this gathering, could see the narrow streets waxing dark with moving forms. She saw the casements thrown open one by one, heads and shoulders filling the dark squares of the window frames. And down below, the arrival of the town-crier, with his halberd and his bell, a crowd of diminutive ant-like forms pressed round his heels. A grey picture, yet all alive with movement, like unto one over which an impatient artist has hastily passed an obliterating brush; the outlines blurred, the colours dull and hazy in the humid atmosphere. It all seemed so dreamlike, so remote. Only a week ago life had appeared so exquisitely gay and so easy! An ardent lover, a happy future, home, adventure! Everything was tumbling out fulsomely from the Cornucopia of Fate. And now all the tragedy represented by those running people below; the enemy at the gates; the abandoned homes; the devastated city; crying children and starving women⁠—a whole herd of fugitives wandering over the desolate marshland, seeking shelters in cities already over-filled, asking for food where so little was to be had.</p>
				<p>It was cruel! Oh, horribly cruel! And aweful to see the children dancing around the town-crier, teasing by pulling at his doublet or trying to steal his bell. The crowd in the market-place had become very dense, and still people came running out of the side streets. The steps of <abbr>St.</abbr> Maria Kerk were black with the moving throng, and Gilda thought with added heartache of that same crowd, five short days ago, rallying for a holiday, cheering her and her handsome lover, wishing her joy and prosperity in the endless days to come.</p>
				<p>Soon the city appeared weltering in confusion. The town-crier continued to ply his bell, and to call the proclamation ordered by the burgomaster. He went on so that every citizen in turn might hear, and now the crowd no longer tended all one way. Some had heard and were hurrying home to consult with their families, to make arrangements either for speedy departure or for weathering the terrible alternative of an invading army. Others lingered in groups on the market-place or at street corners, discussing or lamenting, according to their temperament, pausing to ask friends what they would do or what they thought of the terrible situation.</p>
				<p>Gilda, up at the attic casement, could almost guess by the attitude, the gestures of the scared human ants, just how unsteady had become their mental balance. It was all so unexpected, and there was nothing that anyone could do to help in this terrible emergency. The Stadtholder was going back to camp. He had declared that he could not help. Threatened from every side, he could not spare his forces to come to the aid of so small a place as Amersfoort. And he⁠—the stranger with the happy smile and the gay, inconsequent temper⁠—who had been sent across the Veluwe to obtain succour⁠—had failed to return. There was no garrison at Amersfoort, so there was nothing for it but to flee.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-6-1" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">5</h3>
				<p>At what precise moment Gilda became aware of the solitary rider galloping <i xml:lang="fr">tête baissée</i> toward the city, it were impossible to say. He came out of the mist from the direction of Utrecht, and Gilda saw him long before the sentry at the Joris Poort challenged him. Apparently he had papers and all necessaries in order, for he was admitted without demur; and at the sight Gilda turned away from her point of vantage, ran across the attic chamber and down the stairs. It was such a very short distance between the Joris Poort and the front door of the burgomaster’s house, and she wanted so much to be the first to welcome him.</p>
				<p>It was then half an hour before noon. The city by this time was in the throes of a complete upheaval. The noise in the streets had become incessant and deafening. Church bells tolling, town-criers bawling, the clang of the halberds of the city guards mingling with the rattle of cart-wheels upon the cobble-stones, with the tramping of hundreds of feet and stamping of innumerable horses’ hoofs. The air was resonant with shrieks and cries, with the grating and jarring of metal, with peal of bells and the hubbub of a throng on the move. Gilda, when she reached the foot of the stairs, found herself facing the wide-open doorway, and through it saw the quay alive with people running, with horses and driven cattle, with crowds scrambling into the boats down below, with carts and dogs and children and barrows piled up with furniture and luggage hastily tied together.</p>
				<p>The confusion bewildered her. Determined not to allow futile terror to overmaster her, she, nevertheless, felt within her whole being the sense of an impending catastrophe. She could not approach the door, because the crowd was swarming up the stone steps, and her father’s serving-men, armed with stout sticks and cudgels, had much ado to keep some of the more venturesome or more terrified among that throng from invading the house.</p>
				<p>How that solitary rider whom she had spied in the distance would succeed in forging his way through the dense mass of surging humanity, she could not imagine; and yet through all the turmoil, the din, the terror she was more conscious of his nearness than of any other sensation. The longing to see him was, in a certain sort of way, appeased. She knew that he lived and that time alone stood between her present and past longing and the bliss of nestling once more in his arms.</p>
				<p>Oh, the crowd! It was rapidly becoming unmanageable. The serving-men plied their cudgels in vain. There were men and women there stronger and bolder than others who were determined to have a word with the burgomaster.</p>
				<p>“I am Mynheer Beresteyn’s friend!” was shouted authoritatively to the helpless guardians of their master’s privacy. Or, “You know me, Anton? Make way for me there. I must speak with the burgomaster!”</p>
				<p>“The burgomaster is busy!” the serving-men bawled out until they were hoarse. “No one can be admitted!”</p>
				<p>But it was difficult for any man to raise a stick against well-known burghers of the city, friends and acquaintances who had supped here in the house at Mynheer’s own table; and the pressure became more and more difficult to withstand every moment. Some of the people had actually pushed their way into the hall, making it impossible for Gilda to get near the door; and the longing was irresistible to be close at hand when he dismounted, so that her smile might be the first to greet him as he ran up the steps. She pictured it all⁠—his coming, his appearance, the way he would look about him, knowing that she must be near.</p>
				<p>Then all at once something awful happened. Gilda, from where she stood, could neither see nor hear what it was; and yet she knew, just from looking at the crowd, that something more immediately terrifying had turned this seething mass of humanity into a horde of scared beasts. Their movements suddenly became more swift; it seemed as if some fearsome goad had been applied to the entire population of the city, and the desire, to get away, to run, to flee had become more insistent.</p>
				<p>Those who had swarmed up the steps of the burgomaster’s house ran down again. They had no longer the desire to speak with anyone, or to appeal to the servants to let them pass. They only wanted to run like the others, the few more grave ones gathering their scattered families around them like a mother hen does her chicks.</p>
				<p>And, oh, the awful din! It had intensified a thousand-fold, and seemed all of a sudden like hell let loose. So many people shrieked, the women and the children for the most part. And the boatmen down on the water, plying for hire their small craft, already dangerously overloaded with fugitives and their goods. But now everyone on the quay appeared obsessed with the desire to get into the boats. There was scrambling and fighting upon the quay, shrieks of terror followed by ominous splashes in the murky waters. Gilda closed her eyes, not daring to look.</p>
				<p>And still the clang of the church bells tolling and the hideous cacophony of a whole population stampeding in a mad panic.</p>
				<p>The hall, the doorway, the outside steps were now deserted. Life and movement and din were all out on the quay and in the streets around. The serving-men even had thrown down their sticks and cudgels. Some of them had disappeared altogether, others stood in groups, skulking and wide-eyed. Gilda tried to frame a query. Her pale, anxious face no doubt expressed the words which her lips could not utter, for one of the men in the hall replied in a husky whisper:</p>
				<p>“The Spaniards! They are on us!”</p>
				<p>She wanted to ask more, for at first it did not seem as if this were fresh news. The Spaniards were at Ede, the town was being evacuated because of them. What had occurred to turn an ordered evacuation into so redoubtable a stampede?</p>
				<p>And still no sign of my lord.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-6-1" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">6</h3>
				<p>Then suddenly the doors of the banqueting-hall were thrown open, and the burgomaster appeared. Had Gilda doubted for a moment that something catastrophic had actually happened, she would have felt her doubts swept aside by the mere aspect of her father. He, usually so grave, so dignified, was trembling like a reed, his hair was dishevelled, his cheeks of a grey, ashen colour. The word “Gilda” was actually on his lips when he stepped across the threshold, and quite a change came over him the moment he caught sight of his daughter. Before he could call to her she was already by his side, and in an instant he had her by the hand and dragged her with him back into the banqueting-hall.</p>
				<p>“What has happened?” she asked, in truth more bewildered than frightened.</p>
				<p>“The Spaniards!” her father replied briefly. “They are on us.”</p>
				<p>“Yes,” she ventured, frowning; “but⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Not three leagues away,” he broke in curtly. “Their vanguard will be here by nightfall.”</p>
				<p>She looked round her, puzzled to see them all so calm in contrast to the uproar and the confusion without. The Stadtholder was sitting beside the table, his head resting on his hand. He looked woefully ill. Nicolaes Beresteyn was beside him, whispering earnestly.</p>
				<p>“What are you going to do, father dear?” Gilda asked in a hurried whisper.</p>
				<p>“My fellow-burghers and I are remaining at our posts,” Beresteyn replied quietly. “We must do what we can to save our city, and our presence may do some good.”</p>
				<p>“And Nicolaes?” she asked again.</p>
				<p>“Nicolaes has his horse ready. He will take you to Utrecht in His Highness’s train.” Then, as Gilda made no comment on this, only gave his hand a closer pressure, he added tentatively: “Unless you would prefer to go with Mynheer van den Poele and his family. He is taking Kaatje and her mother to Amsterdam.”</p>
				<p>“I would prefer to remain with you,” she said simply.</p>
				<p>“Impossible, my dear child!” he retorted.</p>
				<p>“My place is here,” she continued firmly, “and I’ll not go. Oh, can’t you understand?” she pleaded, with a break in her voice. “If you sent me away, I should go mad or die!”</p>
				<p>“But, Gilda⁠—” the poor man protested.</p>
				<p>“My lord is here,” Gilda suddenly broke in more calmly.</p>
				<p>“My lord? What do you mean?”</p>
				<p>“I saw him awhile ago. I was up in the attic-chamber, he came through the Joris Poort.”</p>
				<p>“Your eyes deceived you. He would be here by now.”</p>
				<p>“He should be here,” she asserted. “I cannot understand what has happened. Perhaps the crowd⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Your eyes deceived you,” he reiterated, but more doubtfully this time. Then, as just at that moment the Stadtholder and caught his eye, Beresteyn called to him, “My daughter says that my lord has returned.”</p>
				<p>“Impossible!” burst forth impulsively from Nicolaes.</p>
				<p>“Why should it be impossible?” Gilda retorted quickly, and fixed coldly challenging eyes upon her brother. “Why should you say that it is impossible?” she insisted, seeing that Nicolaes now looked shamefaced and confused. “What do you know about my lord?”</p>
				<p>“Nothing, nothing!” Nicolaes stammered. “I did not mean that, of course; it only seems so strange⁠—” And he added roughly, “Then why is he not here?”</p>
				<p>“The crowd is very dense about the streets,” one of the burghers suggested. “My lord, mayhap hath found it difficult to push his way through.”</p>
				<p>“Why should he be coming to Amersfoort?” mused Mynheer Beresteyn.</p>
				<p>“He came from the direction of Utrecht,” Gilda replied. “Some one at the camp must have told him that His Highness was here.”</p>
				<p>“No one knew I was coming hither,” the Stadtholder broke in impatiently.</p>
				<p>“My sister more like hath been troubled with visions,” Nicolaes rejoined with a sneer. “Nor have we the time,” he added, “to wait on my lord’s pleasure. If your Highness is ready, we should be getting to horse.”</p>
				<p>“But surely,” Gilda protested with pitiful earnestness, “your Highness will wait to see your messenger. He must be bringing news from Messire Marquet. He⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Yes,” the Stadtholder broke in decisively, “I’ll see him. Let some one go out into the streets at once and find the man. Tell him that we are waiting⁠—”</p>
				<p>“He knows his way about the town,” Nicolaes interposed, with an ill-concealed note of spite in his voice. “Why should he need a pilot?”</p>
				<p>There was a moment’s silence. Every one looked nervy and worried. Then the Stadtholder turned once more to the burgomaster, and queried abruptly:</p>
				<p>“Are those two companions of my lord’s still in your house, mynheer? Can you not send one of them?”</p>
				<p>The suggestion met with universal approval. And Mynheer Beresteyn himself urged the advisability of finding my lord’s friends immediately. He took his daughter’s hand. It was cold as ice, and quivered like a wounded bird in his warm grasp. He patted it gently, reassuringly. Her wild eyes frightened him. He knew what she suffered, and in his heart condemned his son for those insinuations against the absent. But this was not a moment for delicacy or for scruples. The hour was a portentous one, and fraught with peril for a nation and its chief. The individual matters so little at such times. The feelings, the sufferings, the broken heart of one women or one man⁠—how futile do they seem when a whole country is writhing in the throes of her death agony?</p>
				<p>“Go, my dear child,” Beresteyn admonished firmly. “Obey His Highness’s commands. Find my lord’s friends and tell them to go at once, and return hither with my lord. Go,” he added; and whispered gently in Gilda’s ear, as he led her, reluctant yet obedient, to the door, “Leave your husband’s honour in my hands.”</p>
				<p>She gave him a grateful look, and he gave her hand a last reassuring pressure. Then he let her go from him, only urging her to hurry back.</p>
				<p>It must not be supposed for a moment that he did not feel for her in her anxiety and her misery. But the man in question was a stranger⁠—an Englishman, what?⁠—and Mynheer Beresteyn was above all a patriot, a man who had suffered acutely for his country, had sacrificed his all for her, and was ready to do it again whenever she called to him. The Stadtholder stood for the safety and the integrity of the United Provinces; he was the champion and upholder of her civil and religious liberties. His personal safety stood, in the minds of Beresteyn and his fellow burghers, above every consideration on earth.</p>
				<p>Gilda knew this, and though she trusted her father implicitly, she knew that her beloved would be ruthlessly sacrificed, even by him, if, through misadventure or any other simple circumstance entirely beyond his control, he happened to have failed in the enterprise which had been entrusted to him. Nicolaes, of course, was an avowed enemy. Why? Gilda could not conjecture. Was it jealousy, or petty spite only? If so, what advantage could he reap from the humiliation of one who already was a member of his own family? But she felt herself encompassed with enemies. No one had attempted to defend my lord’s honour when it was so ruthlessly impugned save her father, and he was too absorbed, too much centered in thoughts of his country’s peril, to do real battle for the absent.</p>
				<p>It was with a heavy heart that she turned to go up the stairs in search of the two men who alone were ready to go through fire in the defense of their friend. A melancholy smile hovered round Gilda’s lips. She felt that with those two quaint creatures she had more in common at this hour than with her father, whom she idolized. In those too poor caitiffs she had all that her heart had been hungering for: simple hearts that understood her sorrow, loyal souls that never wavered. For evil or for good, through death-peril or through seeming dishonour, their friend whom they reverenced could count upon their devotion. And as Gilda went wearily up the stairs, her mind conjured up the picture of those two ludicrous vagabonds, with their whimsical saws and rough codes of honour, and she suddenly felt less lonely and less sad.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-6-1" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">7</h3>
				<p>Great was her disappointment, therefore, when she reached the guest-chamber, which they still occupied, to find that it was empty. The whole house was by this time in a hopeless state of turmoil and confusion. Serving-men and maids rushed aimlessly hither and thither, up and down the stairs, along the passages, in and out of the rooms; or stood about in groups, whispering or cowering in corners. Some of them had already fled; the few who remained looked like so many scared chickens, fussy and inconsequent⁠—the maids, with kirtles awry and hair unkempt, the men striving to look brave and determined, putting on the air of masters, and adding to the maids’ distress by their aimless, hectoring ways.</p>
				<p>There was nothing in the house now left of that orderly management which is the pride of every self-respecting housewife. Doors stood open, displaying the untidiness of the rooms; there was noise and bustle everywhere, calls of distress and loud admonitions. From no one could Gilda learn what she desired to know. She was forced to seek out Maria, her special tiring-woman, who, it was to be hoped, had some semblance of reason left in her. Maria, however, had no love for the two rapscallions, who were treated in the house as if they were princes, and knew nothing of the respect due to their betters. She replied to her young mistress’s inquiries by shrugging her shoulders and calling heaven to witness her ignorance of the whereabouts of those abominable louts.</p>
				<p>“Spoilt, they have been,” the old woman asserted sententiously. “Shamefully spoilt. They have neither order nor decency, nor the slightest regard for the wishes of their betters⁠—”</p>
				<p>“But, Maria, whither have the two good fellows gone?” Gilda broke in impatiently.</p>
				<p>“Gone? Whither have they gone?” Maria ejaculated, in pious ignorance of such probable wickedness. “Nay, that ye cannot expect any self-respecting woman to know. They have gone, the miserable roysterers! Went but an hour ago, without saying by your leave. This much I do know. And my firm belief is that they were naught but a pair of Spanish spies, come to hand us all, body and soul, to⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Maria, I forbid thee to talk such rubbish!” Gilda exclaimed wrathfully.</p>
				<p>And, indeed, her anger and her white and worried look did effectually silence the garrulous woman’s tongue.</p>
				<p>Even the waiting-maids! Even these ignorant fools! Gilda could have screamed with the horror of it all, as if she had suddenly landed in a nest of scorpions and their poison encompassed her everywhere. This story of spies! God in Heaven, how had it come about? Whose was the insidious tongue that had perverted her brother Nicolaes first, and then every trimmer and rogue in the house? Gilda felt as if it might ease her heart to run around with a whip, and lash all these base detractors into acknowledgment of their infamy. But she forced herself to patience.</p>
				<p>A vague instinct had already whispered to her that she must not go back to the banqueting-hall with the news that my lord’s friends had gone, and that no one had any knowledge of their whereabouts. She felt that if she did that, her brother’s sneers would become unendurable, and that she might then be led to retort with accusations against her only brother which she would afterwards forever regret.</p>
				<p>So she waited for awhile, curtly bade Maria to be gone, and to leave her in peace. She wanted to think, to put a curb on her fears and her just wrath against this unseen army of calumniators; for wrath and fear are both evil counsellors. And above all, she wanted to see her beloved.</p>
				<p>He was in the town. She knew it as absolutely as that she was alive. Were her eyes likely to be deceived? Even now, when she closed her eyes, she could see him, as she had done but a few minutes ago, walking his horse through the Joris Poort, his plumed hat shading the upper part of his face. She could see him, with just that slight stoop of his broad shoulders which denoted almost unendurable fatigue. She had noted this at the moment, with a pang of anxiety, and then forgotten it all in the joy of seeing him again. She remembered it all now. Oh, how could they think that she could be deceived?</p>
				<p>Just for a second or two she had the mind to run back to the casement in the attic-chamber and see if she could not from thence spy him again. But surely this would be futile. He must have reached the quay by now, would be at the front door, with no one to welcome him. In truth, the longing to see him had become sheer physical pain.</p>
				<p>So Gilda once more made her way down into the hall.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
