<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Great Interruption</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="chapter-3-1" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>The next moment Diogenes was down on the quay, in time to help Socrates to lift his brother philosopher off the pillion.</p>
				<p>Gilda, a little scared at first, not understanding, looked wonderingly around her, blinking in the glare, until she encountered her father’s troubled glance.</p>
				<p>“What is it?” she murmured, half-stupidly.</p>
				<p>He tried to explain, pointed to the group down below, the funny, fat man in obvious pain and distress, being lifted off the horse and received in those same strong arms which had sheltered her⁠—Gilda⁠—but a moment ago.</p>
				<p>The Stadtholder, too, was curious, asked many questions, and had to be waited on deferentially with replies and explanations, which were still of necessity very vague.</p>
				<p>“Attend to his Highness, father,” Gilda said more firmly. “I can look to myself now.”</p>
				<p>She felt a little strange, a little humiliated perhaps, standing here alone, as if abandoned by the very man who but a moment ago had seemed ready to defy every convention for her sake. Just now she had been the centre of attraction, the pivot round which revolved excitement, curiosity, interest. Even the Stadtholder had, for the space of those few minutes, forgotten his cares and his responsibilities in order to think of her and to plead with her father for her freedom and her happiness. Now she was all alone, seemed so for the moment, while her father and Mynheer van den Poele and the older men crowded around his Highness, and every one had their eyes fixed on the curious spectacle below.</p>
				<p>But that sense of isolation and of disappointment was only transient. Gilda Beresteyn had recently gone through experiences far more bitter than this⁠—experiences that had taught her to think and to act quickly and on her own initiative. She saw her lover remounting the steps now. He was carrying his friend in his arms as if the latter had been a child, his other compeer following ruefully. The rowdy ‘prentices had been silenced; two or three kindly pairs of hands had proved ready to assist and to care for the horse, which looked spent. The holiday crowd was silent and sympathetic. Every one felt that in this sudden interruption of the gay and romantic adventure there lurked a something mysterious which might very well prove to be a tragedy.</p>
				<p>It was Gilda who led the way into the house, calling Maria to open a guest-chamber forthwith, one where the bed was spread with freshly-aired linen. The English physician, at a word from the Stadtholder, was ready to minister to the sick man, and Mynheer Beresteyn himself showed the young soldier and his burden up the stairs, while the crowd of wedding guests and of the prince’s bodyguard made way for them to pass through the hall.</p>
				<p>What had been such a merry and excited throng earlier in the day was now more than ever subdued. The happenings in the house of Mynheer Beresteyn, which should have been at this hour solely centred around the Stadtholder and the wedding party, were strange enough indeed to call forth whispered comments and subdued murmurings in secluded corners. To begin with, the Stadtholder had put off his departure for an hour and more, and this apparently at the instance of Diogenes, who had begged for the assistance of the prince’s English physician to minister to his friend.</p>
				<p>People marvelled why the town leech should not have been called in. Why should a strange <i xml:lang="nl">plepshurk’s</i> sickness interfere with his Highness’s movements? Also the Stadtholder appeared agitated and fretful since Diogenes had had a word with him. Maurice of Nassau, acquiescing with unwonted readiness both in his physician remaining to look after the sick man and in the postponement of his own departure, had since then retired to a small private room on a floor above, in the company of Mynheer Beresteyn and several of the more important guests. The others were left to conjecture and to gossip, which they did freely, whilst Gilda was no longer to be seen, and the worthy Kaatje was left pouting and desolate beside her morose bridegroom. Nicolaes Beresteyn, indeed, appeared more moody than any one, although the interruption could not in itself have interfered with his new domestic arrangements. At first he had thought of following his father and Stadtholder into the private chamber upstairs, but to this Mynheer Beresteyn had demurred.</p>
				<p>“Your place, my son,” he said, with a gently mocking smile, “is beside your Kaatje. His Highness will understand.”</p>
				<p>And when Nicolaes, trying to insist, followed his father up the stairs to the very threshold of the council room, Mynheer quite firmly and unceremoniously closed the door in his face.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-1" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">2</h3>
				<p>Up in the guest-chamber, Diogenes was watching over his sick friend. The first moment that he was alone with his two old compeers, he had turned to Socrates and queried anxiously:</p>
				<p>“What is it? What hath happened?”</p>
				<p>“He’ll tell you when he can speak,” the other replied. “We found him lying in the snow outside Lang Soeren with two bullet-wounds in his back, after we had searched the whole <i xml:lang="nl">verfloekte</i> Veluwe for him all day. We took him into Lang Soeren, where there was a leech, who extracted the one bullet that had lodged under his shoulder blade; the other had only passed through the flesh along his ribs, where it made a clean hole but could not otherwise be found.”</p>
				<p>“Well, yes⁠—and⁠—” Diogenes went on impatiently, for the other was somewhat slow of speech.</p>
				<p>“The leech,” Socrates rejoined unperturbed, “said that the patient must lie still for a few days because of the fever; but what must this fool do but shout and rave the moment he is conscious that he must to Amersfoort to see you at once. And so loudly did he shout and so wildly did he rave, that the leech himself got scared and ran away. Whereupon I set the bladder-bellied loon upon the pillion behind me and brought him hither, thinking the ride would do him less harm than all that wild screeching and waving of arms. And here we are!” Socrates concluded blandly, and threw himself into the nearest chair; for he, too, apparently was exhausted with the fatigue of his perilous journey across the waste.</p>
				<p>Just then the leech returned, and nothing more could be said. The sick man groaned a good deal under the physician’s hands, and Socrates presently dropped off to sleep.</p>
				<p>The noise in the street below had somewhat abated, but there was still the monotonous hubbub attendant on a huge crowd on the move. Diogenes went to the window and gazed out upon the throng. Even now the wintry sun was sinking slowly down in the west in a haze of purple and rose, licking the towers of <abbr>St.</abbr> Maria and Joris with glistening tongues of fire, and tinting the snow-covered roofs and gables with a rosy hue. The sluggish waters of the Eem appeared like liquid flame.</p>
				<p>For a few minutes the Koppel-poort, the bridges, the bastions, the helmets and breastplates of the prince’s guard threw back a thousand rays of multi-coloured lights. For a brief instant the earth glowed and blushed under this last kiss of her setting lord. Then all became sombre and dreary, as if a veil had been drawn over the light that illuminated the little city, leaving but the grey shadows visible, and the sadness of evening and the expectance of a long winter’s night.</p>
				<p>Diogenes gave a moody sigh. His fiery temper chafed under this delay. Not for a moment would he have thought of leaving his sick comrade until he had been reassured as to his fate; but if everything had happened as he had planned and wished, he would be half-way to Utrecht by now, galloping adown the lonely roads with a delicious burden upon his saddle-bow, and feeling the cold wintry wind whistling past his ears as he put the leagues behind him.</p>
				<p>He turned away from the window, and tiptoed out of the room. The groans of the sick man, the measured movements of the leech, the snoring of Socrates, were grating on his nerves. Closing the door softly behind him, he strode down the gallery which ran in front of him along the entire width of the house. Up and down once or twice. The movement did him good, and he liked the solitude. The house was still full of a chattering throng; he could hear the murmur of conversation rising from below. Once he peeped over the carved balustrade of the gallery and down into the hall. The prince’s bodyguard was still there, and two or three equerries. The clank of their spurs resounded up the stairs as they moved about on the flag-covered floor.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-1" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">3</h3>
				<p>When Diogenes resumed his pacing up and down, he suddenly became aware of the soft and distant sound of a woman’s voice, singing to the accompaniment of a quaint-toned virginal. He paused and listened. The voice was Gilda’s, and the sentimental ditty which she sang had just that melancholy strain in it which is to be found in the songs of all nations that are foredoomed to suffer and to fight. Chiding himself for a fool, Diogenes, nevertheless, felt for a moment or two quite unable to move. It seemed as if Gilda’s song⁠—he could not catch the words⁠—was tearing at his heart even whilst it reduced him to a state of silent ecstasy. Much against his will he felt the hot tears welling to his eyes. With his wonted impatience he swept them away with the back of his hand.</p>
				<p>“Curse me for a snivelling blockhead!” he muttered; and strode resolutely in the direction whence had come the sweet sad sound.</p>
				<p>Then it was that he noticed that one of the doors which gave on the gallery was ajar. It was through this that the intoxicating sound had come to his ears. After an instant’s hesitation he pushed the door open. It gave on a small panelled room with deep-embrasured window, through which the grey evening light came in, shyly peeping. On the window-ledge a couple of pots of early tulips flaunted their crude colours against the neutral-tinted background, whilst on the shelves in a corner of the room gleamed the vivid blue of bright-patterned china plates. But the flowers and the china and the grey evening light were but momentary impressions, which did not fix themselves upon the man’s consciousness. All that he retained clearly was the vision of Gilda sitting at the instrument, her delicate hands resting upon the keys. She had ceased to play, and was looking straight out before her, and Diogenes could see her piquant profile silhouetted against the pale, slivery light. She had changed her stiff bridal robes for a plain gown of dark-coloured worsted, relieved only by dainty cuffs and collar of filmy Flemish lace.</p>
				<p>At the sound of her husband’s footsteps she turned to look on him, and her whole face became wreathed in smiles. He was still booted and spurred, ready for the journey, with his long, heavy sword buckled to his belt; but he had put hat and mantle aside. The moment he came in Gilda put a finger to her lips.</p>
				<p>“Sh-sh-sh!” she whispered. “If you make no noise they’ll not know you are here.”</p>
				<p>She pointed across the room to where a heavy tapestry apparently masked another door.</p>
				<p>“The Stadtholder is in there,” she added naively, “with father and Mynheer van den Poele and a number of other grave seigneurs. Kaatje is weeping and complaining somewhere down in <i xml:lang="nl">mejuffrouw</i> van den Poele’s arms. So I sat down to the virginal and left the door open, so that you might hear me sing; for if you heard I thought you would surely come. I was lonely,” she added simply, “and waiting for you.”</p>
				<p>Quite enough in truth to make a man who is dizzy with love ten thousand times more dizzy still. And Diogenes was desperately in love, more so indeed than he had ever thought himself capable of being. He quietly unbuckled his sword, which clanged against the floor when he moved, and deposited in cautiously and noiselessly in an angle of the room. Then he tiptoed across to the virginal and knelt beside his beloved.</p>
				<p>For a moment or two he rested his head against her cool white hands.</p>
				<p>“To think,” he murmured, with a sigh of infinite longing, “that we might be half-way to Rotterdam by now! But I could not leave my old Pythagoras till I knew that he was in no danger.”</p>
				<p>“What saith the physician, my lord?” she asked.</p>
				<p>“I am waiting now for his final verdict. But he gives me every hope. In an hour I shall know.”</p>
				<p>He paused, trying to read the varying play of emotions upon her face. From the other side of the tapestry came the low sound of subdued murmurings.</p>
				<p>“It would not be too late,” he went on, slightly hesitating, taking her hands in his and forcing her glance to meet his. “You knew I meant to take you to England⁠—to carry you away⁠—to-night?”</p>
				<p>She nodded.</p>
				<p>“Yes, I knew,” she replied. “And I was glad to go.”</p>
				<p>“Will you be afraid to come presently?” he urged, his voice quivering with excitement. “In the dark⁠—I know the road well. We could make Rotterdam by midnight⁠—and set sail for England To-morrow as I had prearranged⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Just as you wish, my dear lord,” she assented simply.</p>
				<p>“I could not wait, <i xml:lang="it">ma donna</i>! I had planned it all⁠—to ride with you Rotterdam to-night⁠—and then to-morrow on the seas⁠—with you⁠—and England in sight, I could not wait!” he reiterated, almost pathetically, so great was his impatience.</p>
				<p>“I am ready to start when you will, my lord,” she said again, with a smile.</p>
				<p>“And you’ll not be afraid?” he insisted. “It will be dark⁠—and cold. We could not reach Rotterdam before midnight.”</p>
				<p>“How should I be afraid of the darkness or of anything,” she retorted, “when I am with you. And how should I be cold, when I am nestling in your arms?”</p>
				<p>He had his arms round her in an instant. He would have kissed her if he dared. But with the kiss all restraint would of a surety have vanished, as doth the snow in the warm embrace of the sun. He would have seized her then and there once more and carried her away. And this time no consideration on earth would have stayed him. With a muttered exclamation, he jumped to his feet and passed his slender hand across his forehead.</p>
				<p>“Good <abbr>St.</abbr> Bavon!” he murmured whimsically. “Why are you so unkind to me to-night?”</p>
				<p>And she, a little disappointed because, in truth, she had been ready for the kiss, rejoined with a quaint little pout:</p>
				<p>“You are always appealing to <abbr>St.</abbr> Bavon, my dear lord! Why is that?”</p>
				<p>“Because,” he replied very seriously, “<abbr>St.</abbr> Bavon is the patron saint of all men that are weak.”</p>
				<p>She fixed great, wondering eyes on him. The reply was ambiguous; she did not quite understand the drift of it.</p>
				<p>“But you, my lord, are so strong,” she objected.</p>
				<p>It was perhaps too dark for her to see the expression in his face; but even so she felt herself unaccountably blushing under that gaze which she could not clearly see. Whereupon he uttered an ejaculation which sounded almost as if he were angered, and abruptly, without any warning, he turned on his heel and went out of the room, leaving Gilda alone once more beside the virginal.</p>
				<p>But she no longer felt the desire to sing. The happiness which filled her entire soul was too complete even for song.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-1" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">4</h3>
				<p>One of the equerries had awhile ago found his way to the guest-chamber where the sick man was lying, and had informed Diogenes that the Stadtholder was now ready to start on his way, but desired his presence that he might take his leave. Then it was that Diogenes sent an urgent message to his Highness, entreating him to remain but a little while longer. The sick man was better, would soon wake out of a refreshing sleep. Diogenes would then question him. Poor old Pythagoras had something to say, something that the Stadtholder himself must hear. Of this Diogenes was absolutely convinced.</p>
				<p>“I know it,” the young soldier asserted earnestly. “I seem to feel it in my bones.”</p>
				<p>Whereupon the Stadtholder had decided to wait, and Diogenes, after his brief glimpse of Gilda, felt easier in his mind, less impatient. Already he chided himself for his gloomy forebodings. Since his beloved was ready to entrust herself to him, the journey to England would only be put off by a few hours. What need to repine? Joy would be none the less sweet for this brief delay.</p>
				<p>A quarter of an hour later Pythagoras was awake the physician out of the room, and Diogenes was sitting on the edge of the bed holding his faithful comrade’s hand, and trying to disentangle some measure of coherence out of the other’s tangled narrative, whilst Socrates stood by making an occasional comment or just giving an expressive grunt from time to time. It took both time and patience, neither of which commodities did Diogenes possess in super-abundance; but after the first few moments of listening to the rambling of the sick man, he became very still and attentive. The busy house, the noisy guests, the waiting Stadtholder down below, all slipped out from his ken. Holding his comrade’s hand, he was with him on the snow-clad Veluwe, and had found his way with him into the lonely mill.</p>
				<p>“It was the Lord of Stoutenburg,” Pythagoras averred, with as much strength as he could command. “I’d stake my life on’t! I knew him at once. How could I ever forget his ugly countenance, after all he made you suffer?”</p>
				<p>“Well⁠—and?” queried Diogenes eagerly.</p>
				<p>“I knew the other man too, but could not be sure of his name. He was one of those who was with Stoutenburg that day at Ryswick, when you so cleverly put a spoke in their abominable wheel. I knew them both, I tell you!” the sick man insisted feverishly; “but I had the good sense not to betray what I knew.”</p>
				<p>“But Stoutenburg did not know you?” Diogenes insisted.</p>
				<p>“Yes, he did,” the other replied, sagely nodding his head. “That is why he ordered his menial to put a bullet into my back. The two noble gentlemen questioned me first,” he went on more coherently; “then they plied me with wine. They wanted to make me drunk so as to murder me at their leisure.”</p>
				<p>“They little know they, eh, thou bottomless barrel?” Diogenes broke in with a laugh. “The cask hath not been fashioned yet that would contain enough liquor even to quench thy thirst, what?”</p>
				<p>“They plied me with wine,” Pythagoras reiterated gravely; “and then I pretended to get very drunk. For I soon remarked that the more drunk they thought I was, the more freely they talked.”</p>
				<p>“Well, and what did they say?”</p>
				<p>“They talked of De Berg crossing the Ijssel with ten thousand men between Doesburg and Bronchorst; and of Isembourg coming up from Kleve at the same time. I make no doubt that the design is to seize Arnheim and Nijmegen. They talked a deal about Arnheim, which they thought was scantily garrisoned and could easily be taken by surprise and made to surrender. Having got these two cities, the plan is to march across the Veluwe and offer battle to the Stadtholder with a force vastly superior to his, if in the meanwhile⁠—”</p>
				<p>He paused. It seemed as if his voice, hoarse with fatigue, was refusing him service. Diogenes reached for the potion which stood on a small table beside the bed. The sick man made a wry face.</p>
				<p>“Physic?” he ejaculated reproachfully. “From you, old compeer? Times were when⁠—”</p>
				<p>“There will be a time now,” retorted the other gruffly, “when you’ll sink back into a raging fever, and will be babbling bibulous nonsense if you don’t do as you are told.”</p>
				<p>“I’ll sink into a raging fever now,” the sick man retorted fretfully, “if I have not something potable to drink ere long.”</p>
				<p>“You’ll drink this physic now, old compeer,” Diogenes insisted, and held the mug to his friend’s parched lips, forcing him to drink. “Then I’ll see what can be done for you later on.”</p>
				<p>He schooled himself to patience and gentleness. At all costs Pythagoras must complete his narrative. There was just something more that he wished to say, apparently⁠—something fateful and of deadly import, but which for some obscure reason he found difficult to put into words.</p>
				<p>“Now then, old friend, make an effort!” Diogenes urged insistently. “There is still something on your mind. What is it?”</p>
				<p>Pythagoras’ round, beady eyes were rolling in their sockets. He looked scared, like one who has gazed on what is preternatural and weird.</p>
				<p>“Stoutenburg has a project,” he resumed after a while, and sank his spent voice to the merest whisper. “Listen, my compeer; for the very walls have ears. Bend yours to me. There! That’s better,” he added, as Diogenes bent his long back until his ear was almost on a level with the sick man’s lips. “Stoutenburg hath a project, I tell you. A damnable project, akin to the one which you caused to abort three months ago.”</p>
				<p>“Assassination?” Diogenes queried curtly.</p>
				<p>The sick man nodded.</p>
				<p>“Do you know the details?”</p>
				<p>“Alas, no! But it is aimed at the Stadtholder. What form it is to take I know not, and they had evidently talked it all over before. It seemed almost as if the other man⁠—Stoutenburg’s friend⁠—was horrified at the project. He tried to argue once or twice, and once I heard him say quite distinctly: ‘Not that, Stoutenburg! Let us fight him like men; even kill him, like men kill one another. But not like that.’ But my Lord Stoutenburg only laughed.”</p>
				<p>Diogenes was silent. He was deep in thought.</p>
				<p>“You had no other indication?” he asked reflectively.</p>
				<p>“No,” Pythagoras replied. “All I saw was that my lord kept the finger and thumb of his right hand in a hidden pocket of his doublet, and once he said: ‘The Prince of Poets’ taught me to manufacture them; and I supply them to him you know of, wherever he can find an opportunity to come out here to me. He uses them at his discretion. But we can judge by results! And then he laughed because his friend appeared to shudder. I was puzzled,” the sick man went on wearily, “because of it all; and I marvelled who the Prince of Poets might be, for I am no scholar and I thought that perhaps⁠—”</p>
				<p>“You are quite sure Stoutenburg said ‘Prince of Poets’?” Diogenes insisted, frowning. “Your ears must have been buzzing by then.”</p>
				<p>“I am quite sure,” Pythagoras asserted. “But I could not see what he had in his hand.”</p>
				<p>Diogenes said nothing more, and silence fell upon the stately chamber, the sombre panelling and heavy tapestries of which effectually deadened every sound that came from the outside. Only the monumental clock up against the wall ticked in a loud monotone. The sick man, wearied with so much talking, fell back against the pillows. The shades of evening were quickly gathering in now; the corners of the room were indistinguishable in the gloom. Only the bed-clothes still gleamed white in the uncertain light. From the distant tower of <abbr>St.</abbr> Maria Kerk a bell chimed the hour of seven. A few minutes went by. Anon there came a scratching at the door.</p>
				<p>In response to Diogenes’ loud “Enter!” the physician came in, preceded by a serving-man carrying two lighted candles in massive silver sconces.</p>
				<p>“His Highness cannot wait any longer,” the physician said, as soon as he had perceived Diogenes, still sitting pensive on the edge of the bed. “And as I have no anxiety about the patient now, I will, by your leave, place him in your hands.”</p>
				<p>Diogenes appeared to wake as if out of a dream. He rose and looked about him somewhat vaguely. The physician thought he must have been asleep.</p>
				<p>“Will you pay your respects to his Highness?” the latter said. “I think he desires to see you.”</p>
				<p>Just for a moment Diogenes remained quite still. The physician had approached the sick man, and was surveying him with critical but obviously reassured attention. Socrates was again snoring somewhere in a far corner of the room, and the serving-man, having placed the candles on the table, stood waiting at the door.</p>
				<p>“Yes. I’ll to his Highness,” Diogenes said abruptly; and, beckoning to the serving-man to precede him, he strode out of the room.</p>
				<p>Outside on the landing he paused. Then, with a characteristic, impulsive gesture, he suddenly beat his forehead with the palm of his hand.</p>
				<p>“The Prince of Poets, of course!” he murmured under his breath. “Francis Borgia, the true descendant of his infamous ancestors! Poison! And a slow one at that! Oh, the miserable assassins! Please God, this knowledge hath not come too late!” he added with earnest fervor.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-1" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">5</h3>
				<p>A quarter of an hour later the Stadtholder was in possession of all the facts as they had been revealed to Diogenes by his comrade in arms.</p>
				<p>“I seem fated,” he said to Diogenes kindly, yet not without a measure of bitterness, “to owe my safety to you and your brother philosophers.”</p>
				<p>He was discussing De Berg’s surprise plans on Arnheim and Nijmegen. Of that abominable crime, hatched with the chance aid of a poison-mongering Borgia, Diogenes had not as yet spoken one word. Accustomed to swift decisions and prompt action, he had already made up his mind that he would speak of it first to the English physician, whose business it would be to see to it that the insidious poison no longer reached the prince’s lips, at the same time enjoining the strictest secrecy in the matter; for it would only be by rigid circumspection and ceaseless watching that the assisin’s accomplice could be brought to justice.</p>
				<p>Mynheer Beresteyn and some of his older friends were in the room with his Highness. They all put their grave heads together, for there was no doubt that the Archduchess’s advisers had planned an invasion of the United Provinces on a grand scale.</p>
				<p>“Arnheim is insufficiently defended, of that there’s no doubt,” the Stadtholder said. “It was my intention to reinforce all the frontier cities, and to keep their garrisons up to the requisite numbers. If I only had the strength⁠—”</p>
				<p>He paused. The feeling of physical weakness consequent on disease caused him endless and acute bitterness.</p>
				<p>“It is not too late to send troops to Arnheim and to Nijmegen,” Diogenes broke in, in his usual abrupt manner. “Three thousand in one city, four thousand in the other would be sufficient, if your Highness can act quickly.”</p>
				<p>“I cannot detach seven or eight thousand troops from my forces at the present moment,” the prince rejoined. “If Spinola were to attack from the south I am only just strong enough to defend myself as it is.”</p>
				<p>“Marquet is in Overijssel, I believe,” urged the soldier. “He hath three or four thousand troops. Let him push on to Arnheim to reinforce the garrison.”</p>
				<p>“And De Keysere is at Wageningen,” the prince broke in, fired, despite himself, by the other’s enthusiasm. “He hath three thousand mercenaries from Switzerland and Germany.”</p>
				<p>“Excellent fighters and well-seasoned,” Diogenes asserted. “And trained under Maurice of Nassau, the first captain of this or any epoch!”</p>
				<p>“Ay!” sighed Maurice wearily. “But time is against us. Marquet is at Vorden⁠—”</p>
				<p>“But Arnheim and Nijmegen can hold out for awhile,” Diogenes argued forcefully.</p>
				<p>“And would hold out to the last man,” Mynheer Beresteyn added, “if they knew that succor would come in due course.”</p>
				<p>“ ’Tis only uncertainty that paralyses the endurance of a garrison,” Diogenes went on with firm emphasis. “Send to Arnheim and to Nijmegen, your Highness! Bid them hold out against any attack until you come with ten thousand troops to their aid. In the meanwhile, send orders to Marquet and to De Keysere to advance forthwith with reinforcements for these two garrisons. Then raise your standard once more in Friesland, Drenthe, and Groningen. I’ll warrant you will have twenty thousand men there ready to fight once more for liberty and for you!”</p>
				<p>His sonorous voice rang clear and metallic in the small, panelled room. His enthusiasm appeared almost like a living thing, a tangible force that touched the hearts and minds of all the solemn burghers here, causing their eyes to glow and their fists, not yet wholly unskilled in the use of the sword, to clench with inward excitement. The Stadtholder looked up at him with undisguised admiration.</p>
				<p>“Is it the English blood in you, man,” he said with a smile, “that makes you valorous in war and wise in counsel?”</p>
				<p>Diogenes shrugged his broad shoulders.</p>
				<p>“I fought for your Highness before now,” he rejoined, with a quaint, self-deprecating laugh, “when I had nothing to lose save my skin, and still less to gain. The English blood in me dearly loves a fight, and all doth hate the Spaniard and all his tyrannies.”</p>
				<p>“Then I can reckon on you?” the prince riposted quickly.</p>
				<p>“On me, your Highness?” the other exclaimed.</p>
				<p>“On you, of course. With your mother’s blood in your veins, the United Provinces have a double claim on you. You have fought for us before, as you say, unknown to us then, an obscure soldier of fortune with nothing to lose and but little to gain. Join us now, man, in the field and under the council tent. Get to horse to-night. You will find Marquet at Vorden, on his way south from Overijssel. Tell him to push on at once to Arnheim with all the troops he hath at his command. From thence I would bid you go straightway to De Keysere, who is at Wageningen, and order him to reinforce Nijmegen forthwith with three thousand men, if we have them. Tell both Marquet and De Keysere to fight and hold the towns. I’ll to their aid as soon as may be. Then, man, join my brother Frederick, and help him to raise my standard in Gelderland and in Overijssel, and rally ten thousand men to our cause. I feel that success will attend our arms if we keep you by our side.”</p>
				<p>Maurice of Nassau had spoken with more vigor and verve than he had shown for the past three months. Indeed, his deeply anxious friends could not help but feel that the old fighting spirit of this peerless commander had not wholly been undermined by disease. Five pairs of eager eyes had scanned his features while he spoke; five hearts beat in response to his enthusiasm. Now, when he had finished speaking, Mynheer Beresteyn and the others turned their expectant gaze upon the stranger who had been so signally honoured; but he looked uncertain, gravely perturbed. In the flickering light of the wax candles his face appeared haggard and drawn, and a set line had crept around his ever-laughing lips.</p>
				<p>“You seem to hesitate, my friend,” the Stadtholder remarked, with that tone of bitterness which had become habitual to him. “Methought you said that the English blood in you dearly loved a fight. But in truth, I had forgotten! You have other claims upon you now⁠—one, at least, which is paramount. An easy, untroubled life awaits you. No wonder you hesitate to embark on so perilous an adventure!” Then, as if loth to give up the thought that was foremost in his mind, he added, with persuasive insistence; “If you followed me, you’d have everything to gain⁠—nothing to lose save a sentimental pastime.”</p>
				<p>Just then Diogenes caught Mynheer Beresteyn’s eyes fixed steadily upon him. The old man who knew well enough what was going on in that wayward, turbulent mind⁠—the doubts, the fears, the hideous, horrible disappointment.</p>
				<p>Nothing to lose! Ye gods, at the hour when a whole life’s happiness not only beckoned insistently, but was actually there to hand, like a bunch of ripe and luscious fruit, ready to drop into a yearning hand! Here was the end of a vagabond life, here was love and home and peace, and all to be given up as soon as found to the equally insistent call of honour and of duty!</p>
				<p>The others did not speak; perhaps they, too, understood. Men in those days were used to stern sacrifices. They and there forebears had given up their all so that their children’s children might live in freedom and security. They only marvelled if this stranger, with the combative English blood in him, would give up what was so infinitely dear to him⁠—the exquisite wife to whom he had plighted his troth but a few hours ago⁠—and if he would fight for them again as he had done in the past.</p>
				<p>The Stadtholder remained moody and silent, and the close atmosphere of the heavily curtained room seemed to become suddenly still, hushed, as if expectant of the grave decision to come. The wax candles burned quite steadily, with just a tiny fillet of smoke rising up towards the low-raftered ceiling, almost like the incense of silent prayer rising unwaveringly to God.</p>
				<p>To many the silence appeared absolute, but not to the man who stood in the midst of them all beside a table littered with papers and documents, his slender hand⁠—the hand of an idealist, rendered firm and hard by action⁠—resting lightly upon the board. A tense look in his eyes. Through the silence he could hear his beloved in the little room behind the heavy tapestry. He could hear the soft, insidious sound of the quaint-toned virginal, and her voice, tender and melancholy as the call of the bird to its mate, humming the sweet refrain gently under her breath, with every note she seemed to tear at his heart with an unendurable regret for what might have been.</p>
				<p>Oh, it had been such a perfect dream! Gilda and that stately home over in England, and the ride through the night in pursuit of happiness which had proved as elusive as Fata Morgana, as unreal as the phantoms born in the mind of a rhapsodist.</p>
				<p>Then the silence did, indeed, become absolute, even to him. Gilda had ceased her song. Only his straining ears caught the sound of her footsteps as she rose from the virginal, then moved swiftly about the room.</p>
				<p>“Well,” the Stadtholder reiterated, after awhile, “which is it to me, my friend? I start for Utrecht within the hour and if we are to save Arnheim and Nijmegen, you should be on your way to Vorden with the necessary moneys and my written orders to-night. Of course, I cannot compel you,” he added simply “The decision rests with you, and if you⁠—”</p>
				<p>The words died on his lips, and in an instant all eyes were turned to that end of the room where a heavy portière divided it from the room beyond. A faint rustling sound had come from there, then the grating of metal rings upon the cornice-pole that held the tapestry. The next moment Gilda appeared in the doorway, shadowy, wraith-like in her sombre gown that melted into the gloom. Just her small, white face and delicate hands stood out against the murky background, and the gossamer lace at her throat and wrists.</p>
				<p>For a moment she stood there, one hand still holding back the heavy portière, quite still, taking in the company at a glance. A sigh of longing and of renunciation came from an overburdened heart, and was wafted up to the foot of Him who knows all and understands all. Then Gilda allowed the tapestry to fall together behind her, and she came quickly forward. In the other hand she was holding, firmly clasped, her husband’s heavy sword.</p>
				<p>She came close to him, and then said simply, with an ingenuous smile: “I thought you might wonder where you had left it. It was in the other room. You will be wanting it, my dear lord, if you start for Vorden within the hour.”</p>
				<p>With deft fingers she buckled the sword to his belt. This, in truth, was her decision, and she had acted with scarce a moment’s hesitation, even whilst he marvelled how he could set to work to break her heart by leaving her this night.</p>
				<p>Now, when their glances met, they understood one another. The power that lay within both their souls had met and, as it were, clasped hands. They accepted one another’s sacrifice. Hers, mayhap, was the more complete of the two, because for her his absence would mean weary waiting, the dull heartache so terrible to bear.</p>
				<p>For the man, the wrench would be eased by action, danger and hard fighting; for her there would be nothing to do but wait. But she acquiesced. No one had seen the struggle which it had cost her, over there in the little room, all alone with only the dumb virginal and the dying light to see the tears of rebellion and of agony which for one brief moment⁠—for her an eternity⁠—had seared her eyes. By the time the full meaning of what she had overheard from the other side of the portière had entered into her brain, she had recovered full outward calm, and had brought him his sword in token of her resolve.</p>
				<p>Gilda Beresteyn came of a race that had learned to fight even from its infancy. She had handled her father’s sword at an age when little maids are content with playthings. Now, when she made the buckles of her husband’s sword secure, she met his glance with perfect serenity, and said simply and calmly:</p>
				<p>“You will find me, as before, in the other room. I will be waiting there to bid you farewell.”</p>
				<p>Then she glided out of the room, wraith-like, ethereal, as she had come. And Diogenes woke as if out of a trance.</p>
				<p>The Stadtholder jumped to his feet. “Then you’re with us?” he exclaimed.</p>
				<p>“If your Highness hath need of me,” the soldier replied.</p>
				<p>“Have I not said so?” the prince retorted. “Henceforth, Sir Percy Blakeney⁠—for that is your name, is it not?⁠—accompanies us as our Master of the Camp wherever we go!”</p>
				<p>“Nay,” the other replied quite firmly and without even a sigh of regret this time, “my name is Diogenes, as it hath always been. It is the nameless and homeless adventurer, the son of the poor Dutch tramp, who once again places his sword at your Highness’s disposal. Sir Percy Blakeney was only a myth, a shade that hath already been exorcized by the magic of your Highness’s call, in the name of our faith and of liberty.”</p>
				<p>“Frankly, man,” the Stadtholder retorted with a smile, “I could not picture you in the character of a placid and uxorious country gentleman, watching with unruffled complacence the life and death struggles of your friends.”</p>
				<p>“I should have waxed obese, your Highness,” Diogenes assented whimsically; “and the horror of it would have sent me to my grave.”</p>
				<p>“Then, you inveterate mocker, are you ready to start?”</p>
				<p>“Booted and spurred, your Highness, and a sword on my hip,” replied the other lightly. “And my horse hath been waiting for me these two hours past.”</p>
				<p>Already Maurice of Nassau was on his feet. He took the sacrifice, the self-denial, as a matter of course; was unaware of it, probably. Every other thought was completely merged in that of the coming struggle⁠—De Berg crossing the Ijssel, Spinola threatening from the south, and victory beckoning once more.</p>
				<p>The burghers crowded round him, speaking words of loyalty and of encouragement. He responded with somewhat curt farewells. His thoughts were no longer here; they were across the Veluwe with Marquet and De Keysere; inside Arnheim and Nijmegen.</p>
				<p>He kept Diogenes by his side, wrote out his orders in sign-manual, discussed plans, possibilities with the man in whose luck and resource he had unbounded belief.</p>
				<p>It took time to get everything ready. There was the financial question, too, for some of the troops were mercenaries, who would be demanding their pay ere they engaged to start on a fresh expedition. For this the aid of the loyal burghers had again to be requisitioned. Arrangements had to be made for credits at Zutphen and Arnheim.</p>
				<p>This part of the great adventure the Stadtholder was willing to leave in the hands of Mynheer Beresteyn and his friends. Money to him was dross, save as a means of gaining his great ends. For the nonce he was in a hurry to get away, to get back to his camp at Utrecht, and to make ready for the coming fight.</p>
				<p>Then at last there came a moment when everything appeared settled. The messenger had his sealed orders, and the credit notes and the read money upon his person. The Stadtholder was back in the hall with his equerries around him, ready for departure, giving brief, decisive orders such as soldiers love to hear.</p>
				<p>But Diogenes did not follow him immediately, and Mynheer Beresteyn remained behind with him. He was the only one who really understood what the once careless and thoughtless adventurer felt at this moment, in face of the inevitable farewell. It was an understanding born in a staunch heart that had known both love and sorrow.</p>
				<p>Beresteyn had idolized his young wife, who had died leaving her baby-girl in his arms. That deep affection the lonely widower had thereupon transferred to his motherless daughter, had cherished and guarded her as his most precious treasure, and had only consented to relinquish her into the guardianship of another because he knew that the other was worthy of the trust.</p>
				<p>He knew also what hungering passion means; he knew the bitterness of parting and of a burning disappointment with the prospect of loneliness through the vista of years. But, with that infinite tact which is the attribute of a self-less heart, he offered no words of consolation or even of comment.</p>
				<p>“I will leave you to bid farewell to Gilda alone,” was all that he said.</p>
				<p>Diogenes nodded in assent. The most terrible moment of this terrible hour was yet to come, for Gilda, having precipitated his decision, was now waiting for the last kiss.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-1" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">6</h3>
				<p>She was, in truth, waiting for him, submissive and composed. What she had done, when she with her own act had mutely bidden him to go, that she did not regret. She had done it not so much perhaps from a sense of duty or of patriotism, but rather because she knew that this course was the only one that he would never rue.</p>
				<p>Hers was that perfect love that dwells on the other’s happiness, and not on its own. She knew that, though for the time being he would find bliss and oblivion in her arms, he would soon repine in inactivity whilst others fought for that which he held sublime.</p>
				<p>So now, when he pushed aside the tapestry and once more stood before her, with the lovelight in his eyes obscured by the shadow of this coming parting, she met him without a tear. The next moment he had her in his arms, and his hand rested lightly across her eyes, lest they should perceived that his were full of tears.</p>
				<p>For a long while he could not speak; then he drew her closer to him and pressed his lips against hers, drinking in all the joy and rapture which he might never taste again.</p>
				<p>“What is it that hath happened, my lord?” she murmured. “I could not hear everything, and did not wish to be caught prying. All that I heard was that the Stadtholder needed you, and that in your heart you knew that your place, whilst there was danger to our land, was by his side, and not by mine.”</p>
				<p>“Your father will explain more fully, my beloved,” he replied. “You are right. The Stadtholder hath need of every willing sword. This unfortunate land is gravely threatened. The Archduchess is throwing the full force of her armies against the Netherlands. His Highness thinks that I might help to save the United Provinces from becoming once more the vassals of Spain. As you say, my place is on this soil where I and my mother were born. I should be a coward indeed were I to turn my back now on this land when danger is so grave. So I am going, my beloved,” he continued simply.</p>
				<p>“To-night I go to Vorden on his Highness’s business, thence on to Wageningen. I shall go, taking your dear image in my heart, and with your exquisite face before me always. For I love you with every fibre of my being, every bone in my body and with every beat of my heart. Try not to weep, my dear. I shall return one day soon to take you in my arms, as I shall clasp your spirit only until then. I shall return, doubt it not. Such love as ours was not created to remain unfulfilled. Whatever may happen, believe and trust in me, as I shall believe in you, and keep the remembrance of me in your heart without sadness and without regret.”</p>
				<p>He spoke chiefly because he dared not trust to the insidiousness of silence. He knew that she wept for the first time because of him. Yet how could it be otherwise? And sorrow made her sacred. When, overcome with grief, she lay half-swooning in his arms, he picked her up quite tenderly and laid her back against the cushions of the chair. Then, as she sat there, pale and wan-looking in the uncertain light of the wax candles, with those exquisite hands of hers lying motionless in her lap, he knelt down before her.</p>
				<p>For a second or two he rested his head against those soft white palms, fragrant as the petals of a lily. Then he rose, and, without looking at her again, he walked firmly out of the room.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
