<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 9</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>CHAPTER <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>⁠—Mala Fides</h2>
			<p class="cpb">1.</p>
			<p>Nicolaes Beresteyn, riding like one possessed had reached Stoutenburg’s encampment one hour before nightfall. He brought the news of the failure of his plan for the capture of the Stadtholder, spoke with many a muttered oath of the Englishman and his two familiars, and of how they had interposed just in the nick of time to stop the runaway horse.</p>
			<p>“But for that cursed rogue!” he exclaimed savagely, “Maurice of Nassau would now be a prisoner in our hands. We would be holding him to ransom, earning gratitude, honours, wealth at the hands of the Archduchess. Whereas⁠—now⁠—”</p>
			<p>But there was solace to the bitterness of this disappointment. The blinding powder, invented by the infamous Borgia, had done its work. The abominable rogue, the nameless adventurer, who had twice succeeded in thwarting the best-laid schemes of his lordship of Stoutenburg, had paid the full penalty for his audacity and his arrogant interference.</p>
			<p>Blind, helpless, broken, an object now of contemptuous pity rather than of hate, he was henceforth powerless to wreak further mischief.</p>
			<p>“Just before I put my horse to a swift gallop,” Nicolaes Beresteyn had concluded, “I saw him sway in the saddle and roll down into the mud. One of the vagabonds tried to chase me; but my horse bore me well and I was soon out of his reach.”</p>
			<p>That news did, indeed compensate Stoutenburg for all the humiliation which he had endured at the hands of his successful rival in the past. A rival no longer; for the Laughing Cavalier, blind and helpless, was not like ever to return to claim his young wealthy wife and to burden her with his misery. This last tribute to the man’s pluck and virility Stoutenburg paid him unconsciously. He could not visualize that splendid creature, so full of life and gaiety, and conscious of might strength, groping his way back to the side of the woman whom he had dazzled by his power.</p>
			<p>“He would sooner die in a ditch,” he muttered to himself, under his breath, “than excite her pity!”</p>
			<p>“Then the field is clear for me!” he added exultantly; and fell to discussing with Nicolaes his chances of regaining Gilda’s affections. “Do you think she ever cared for the rogue?” he queried, with a strange quiver of emotion in his harsh voice.</p>
			<p>Nicolaes was doubtful. He himself had never been in love. He liked his young wife well enough; she was comely and rich. But love? No, he could not say.</p>
			<p>“She’ll not know what has become of him,” Stoutenburg said, striving to allay his own doubts. “And women very quickly forget.”</p>
			<p>He sighed, proud of his own manly passion that had survived so many vicissitudes, and was linked to such a tenacious memory.</p>
			<p>“We must not let her know,” Nicolaes insisted.</p>
			<p>Stoutenburg gave a short, sardonic laugh. “Are you afraid she might kill you if she did?” he queried.</p>
			<p>Then, as the other made no reply, but stood there brooding, his soul a prey to a sudden horror, which was not unlike a vague pang of remorse, Stoutenburg concluded cynically:</p>
			<p>“I’ll give the order that every blind beggar found wandering around the city be forthwith hanged on the nearest tree. Will that allay your fears?”</p>
			<p>Thereafter he paid no further heed to Nicolaes, whom, in his heart, he despised for a waverer and a weakling; but he gave orders to his master of the camp to make an immediate start for Amersfoort.</p>
			<p class="cpb">2.</p>
			<p>Amersfoort had, in the meanwhile, so De Voocht avers, become wonderfully calm. Those whose nerves would not stand the strain of seeing the hated tyrants once more within the gates of their peace-loving little city, those who had no responsibilities, and those who had families, fled at the first rumour of the enemy’s approach. Indeed, for many hours the streets and open places, the quays and the sleepy, sluggish river, had on the first day been nothing short of a pandemonium. Then everything gradually became hushed and tranquil. Those who were panic-stricken had all gone by nightfall; those who remained knew the risk they were taking, and sat in their homes, waiting and pondering. Amersfoort that evening might have been a city of the dead.</p>
			<p>Darkness set in early, and the sea-fog thickened at sundown. Some wiseacres said that the Spaniards would not come until the next day. They proved to be right. The dawn had hardly spread o’er the whole of the eastern sky on the morning of the twenty-second, when the master of the enemy’s camp was heard outside the ramparts, demanding the surrender of the city.</p>
			<p>The summons was received in absolute silence. The gates were open, and the mercenaries marched in. In battle array, with banners flying, with pikemen, halberdiers and arquebusiers; with fifes and drums and a trainload of wagons and horses, and the usual rabble of beggarly camp followers, they descended on the city like locusts; and soon every tavern was filled to overflowing with loud-voiced, swarthy, ill-mannered soldiery, and all the streets and places encumbered with their carts and their horses and their trappings.</p>
			<p>They built a bonfire in the middle of the market-place, and all around it a crowd of out-at-elbows ruffians, men, women, and children, filled the air with their shrieks and their bibulous songs. Some four thousand troops altogether, so De Voocht states, spread themselves out over the orderly, prosperous town, invaded the houses, broke open the cellars and storehouses, made the day hideous with their noise and their roistering.</p>
			<p>As many as could found shelter in the deserted homes of the burghers; others used the stately kerks as stabling for their horses and camping ground for themselves. The inhabitants offered no resistance. A century of unspeakable tyranny ere they had gained their freedom had taught them the stern lesson of submitting to the inevitable. The Stadtholder had ordered them to submit. Until he could come to their rescue they must swallow the bitter cup of resignation to the dregs. It could not be for long. He who before now had swept the Spanish hordes off the sacred soil of the United Provinces could do so again. It was only a case for a little patience. And patience was a virtue which these grave sons of a fighting race knew how to practise to its utmost limit.</p>
			<p>And so the burghers of Amersfoort who had remained in the city in order to watch over its fate and over their property submitted without murmur to the arrogant demands of the invaders. Their wives ministered in proud silence to the wants of the insolent rabble. The saw their dower-chests ransacked, their effects destroyed or stolen, their provisions wasted and consumed. They waited hand and foot, like serving wenches, upon their tyrants; for, indeed, it had been the proletariat who had been the first to flee.</p>
			<p>They even succeeded in keeping back their tears when they saw their husbands⁠—the more noted burghers of the town⁠—dragged as hostages before the commander of the invading troops, who had taken up his quarters in the burgomaster’s house.</p>
			<p>That commander was the Lord of Stoutenburg. In high favour with the Archduchess now, he had desired leave to carry through this expedition to Amersfoort. Private grudge against the man who had robbed him of Gilda, or lust for revenge against the Stadtholder for the execution of Olden Barneveldt, who can tell? Who can read the inner workings of a tortuous brain, or appraise the passions of an embittered heart?</p>
			<p>Attended by all the sinister paraphernalia which he now affected, the Lord of Stoutenburg entered Amersfoort in the late afternoon as a conqueror, his eyes glowing with the sense of triumph over a successful rival and of power over a disdainful woman. The worthy citizens of the little town gazed with astonishment and dread upon his sable banner, broidered in silver with a skull and crossbones⁠—the emblem of his relentlessness, now that the day of reckoning had come.</p>
			<p>He rode through the city, hardly noticing its silent death-like appearance. Not one glance did he bestow on the closed shutters to the right or left of him. His eyes were fixed upon the tall pinnacled roof of the burgomaster’s house, silhouetted against the western sky, the stately abode on the quay where, in the days long since gone by, he had been received as an honoured guest. Since then what a world of sorrow, of passion, of endless misery had been his lot! It seemed as if, on the day when he became false to Gilda Beresteyn in order to wed the rich and influential daughter of Marnix de <abbr>St.</abbr> Aldegonde, fickle fortune had finally turned her back on him. His father and brother ended their days of the scaffold; his wife, abandoned by him and broken-hearted; he himself a fugitive with a price upon his head, a potential assassin, and that vilest thing on earth, a man who sells his country to her enemies.</p>
			<p>No wonder that, at a comparatively early age, the Lord of Stoutenburg looked a careworn and wearied man. The lines on his face were deep and harsh, his hair was turning grey at the temples. Only the fire in his deepset eyes was fierce and strong, for it was fed with the fire of an ever-enduring passion⁠—hatred. Hatred of the Stadtholder; hatred of the nameless adventurer who had thwarted him at every turn; hatred of the woman who had shut him out wholly from her heart.</p>
			<p>But now the hour of triumph had come. For it had schemed and lied and striven and never once given way to despair. It had come, crowned with immeasurable success. The Stadtholder⁠—thanks to the subtle poison of an infamous Borgia, administered by a black-hearted assassin⁠—was nothing but a physical wreck; whilst those who had brought him⁠—Stoutenburg⁠—to his knees three short months ago were at his mercy at last. A longing as cruel as it was vengeful had possession of his soul whenever he thought of these two facts.</p>
			<p>His schemes were not yet mature, and he had not yet arrived at any definite conclusion as to how he would reach the ultimate goal of his desires; but this he did know⁠—that the Stadtholder was too sick to put up a fight for Amersfoort, and that Gilda and her stranger lover were definitely parted, and both of them entirely in his power. Their fate was as absolutely in his hands as his had once been in theirs. And the Lord of Stoutenburg, with his eyes raised to the pinnacled roof of the house that sheltered the woman whom he still loved with such passionate ardour, felt that for the first time for this man a year he might count himself as almost happy.</p>
			<p class="cpb">3.</p>
			<p>Nicolaes Beresteyn was among the last to enter his native city. He did so as a shameless traitor, a dishonoured gambler who had staked his all upon a hellish die. Indeed now he seemed like a man possessed, careless of his crime, exulting in it even. The vague fear of meeting his father and Gilda eye to eye seemed somehow to add zest to his adventure. He did not know how much they knew, or what they guessed, but felt a strange thrill within his tortuous soul at the thought of standing up before them as their master, of defying them and deriding their reproaches.</p>
			<p>His young wife he knew to be away. Her father had started off for Amsterdam with his family and his servants at the first rumour of the enemy’s approach. In any case she was his. She and her wealth and Mynheer van den Poele’s influence and business connexions. He⁠—Nicolaes⁠—who had always been second in his father’s affections always subservient to Gilda and to Gilda’s interests, and who since that affair in January had been treated like a skulking schoolboy in the paternal home, would now rule there as a conqueror, a protector on whose magnanimity the comfort of the entire household would depend.</p>
			<p>These and other thoughts⁠—memories, self-pity, rage, too, and hatred, and imputations against fate⁠—coursed through his mind as he rode into his native city at the head of the rearguard of Stoutenburg’s troops. He drew rein outside his father’s house. Not the slightest stirring of his dormant conscience troubled him as he ran swiftly up the familiar stone steps.</p>
			<p>With the heavy basket-hilt of his rapier he rapped vigorously against the stout oak panels of the door, demanding admittance in the name of the Archduchess Isabella, Sovereign Liege Lady of the Netherlands. At once the doors flew open, as if moved by a spring. Two elderly serving-men stood alone in the hall, silent and respectful.</p>
			<p>At the sight of their young master they both made a movement as if to run to him, deluded for the moment into hopes of salvation, relief from this awful horror of imminent invasion. But he paid no heed to them. His very look chilled them and froze the words of welcome upon their lips, as he strode quickly past them into the hall.</p>
			<p>The shades of evening were now rapidly drawing in. Except for the two serving-men, the house appeared deserted. In perfect order, but strangely still and absolutely dark. As he looked about him, Nicolaes felt as if he were in a vault. A cold shiver ran down his spine. Curtly he bade the men bring lighted candles into the banqueting-hall.</p>
			<p>Here, too, silence and darkness reigned. In the huge monumental hearth a few dying embers were still smouldering, casting a warm glow upon the red tiles, and flicking the knobs and excrescences of the brass tools with minute crimson sparks.</p>
			<p>Nicolaes felt his nerves tingling. He groped his way to one of the windows, and with an impatient hand tore at the casement. Stoutenburg’s troops were now swarming everywhere. The quay was alive with movement. Some of the soldiers were bivouacking against the house, had build up a fire, the ruddy glow of which, together with the flicker of resin torches, thew a weird and uncertain light into the room. Nicolaes felt his teeth chattering with cold. His hands were like fire. Could it be that he was afraid⁠—afraid that in a moment or two he would hear familiar footsteps coming down the stairs, that in a moment or two he would have to face the outraged father, come to curse his traitor son?</p>
			<p>Bah! This was sheer cowardice! But a brief while ago he had exulted in his treachery, gloried in his callous disregard of his monstrous crime. How it seemed to him that a pair of sightless yet still mocking eyes glared at him from out the gloom. With a shudder and a quickly smothered cry of horror, Nicolaes buried his face in his hands.</p>
			<p>The next moment the two serving-men came in, carrying lighted candles in heavy silver candelabra. These they set upon the table; and one of them, kneeling beside the hearth, plied the huge bellows, coaxing the dying embers into flame. After which they stood respectfully by, awaiting further commands. Obviously they had had their orders⁠—absolute obedience and all those outward forms of respect which they were able to accord. Nicolaes looked at them with a fierce, defying glance. He knew them both well. Greybeards in the service of his father, they had seen the young master grow up from cradle to this hour when he stood, a rebel and a skunk, on the paternal hearth.</p>
			<p>But they did not flinch under his glance. They knew that they had been specially chosen for the unpleasant task of waiting upon the enemy commanders because their tempers had no longer the ebullience of youth, and they might be trusted to remain calm in the face of arrogance or even of savagery⁠—even in the face of Mynheer Nicolaes, the child they had loved, the youth they had admired, now a branded traitor, who had come like a thief in the night to barter his honour for a crown of shame.</p>
			<p class="cpb">4.</p>
			<p>A certain commotion outside on the quay proclaimed the fact that the commander of the troops, the Lord of Stoutenburg, had entered the town at the head of his bodyguard, and followed by his master of the camp and his equerries.</p>
			<p>He, too, made straight for the burgomaster’s house, brought his horse to a halt at the foot of the stone steps. With a curt nod, Nicolaes bade the old crones to run to the front door and receive his Magnificence. In this, as in everything else, the men obeyed at once and in silence.</p>
			<p>But already Stoutenburg, preceded by his equerries and his torchbearers, had stepped across the threshold. He knew his way well about the house. As boys, he and his brother Groeneveld had played their games in and around the intricate passages and stairs. As a young man he had sat in the deep window embrasures, holding Gilda’s hand, taking delight in terrifying her with his impetuous love, and forcing her consent to his suit by his masterful wooing. A world of memories, grave and gay, swept over him as he entered the banqueting-hall, where, but for his many misfortunes⁠—as he callously called h is crimes⁠—he would one day have sat at the bridegroom’s table beside Gilda, his plighted wife.</p>
			<p>Both he and Nicolaes felt unaccountably relieved at meeting one another here. For both of them, no doubt, the silence and gloom of this memory-haunted house would in the long run have proved unendurable.</p>
			<p>“I did not know that I should meet you here,” Stoutenburg exclaimed, as he grasped his friend by the hand.</p>
			<p>“I thought it would be best,” Nicolaes replied curtly.</p>
			<p>But this warm greeting from the infamous arch-traitor, in the presence of the two loyal old servants, brought a hot flush to the young man’s brow. The last faint warning from his drugged conscience, mayhap. But the feeling of shame faded away as swiftly as it had come, and the next moment he was standing by, impassive and seemingly unconcerned, while the Lord of Stoutenburg gave his orders to the men.</p>
			<p>These orders were to prepare the necessary beds for my lord and for Mynheer Nicolaes Beresteyn, also for the equerries, and proper accommodation for my lord’s bodyguard, which consisted of twenty musketeers with their captain. Moreover, to provide supper for his Magnificence and mynheer in the banqueting-hall, and for the rest of the company in some other suitable room, without delay.</p>
			<p>The two old crones took the orders in silence, bowed, and prepared to leave the room.</p>
			<p>“Stay,” my lord commanded. “Where is the burgomaster?”</p>
			<p>“In his private apartments, so please you,” one of the men replied.</p>
			<p>“And his daughter?”</p>
			<p>“The <i>jongejuffrouw</i> is with Mynheer the Burgomaster.”</p>
			<p>“Tell them both I want them to sup here with me and Mynheer Nicolaes.”</p>
			<p>Again the men bowed with the same silent dignity. It was impossible to gather from their stolid, mask-like faces what their thoughts might be at this hour. When they had gone, Stoutenburg peremptorily dismissed his equerries.</p>
			<p>“If you have anything to complain of in this house,” he said curtly, “come and report to me at once. To-morrow we leave at dawn.”</p>
			<p>Both the equerries gave a gasp of astonishment.</p>
			<p>“To-morrow?” one of them murmured, apparently quite taken aback by this order.</p>
			<p>“At dawn,” Stoutenburg reiterated briefly.</p>
			<p>This was enough. Neither did the equerries venture on further remarks. They had served for some time now under his Magnificence, knew his obstinacy and the irrevocableness of his decisions when once he had spoken.</p>
			<p>“No further commands until then, my lord?” was all that the spokesman said.</p>
			<p>“None for you,” Stoutenburg replied curtly. “But tell Jan that the moment⁠—the moment, you understand⁠—that the burgomaster enters this room, he is to be prevented from doing any mischief. If he carries a weapon, he must at once be disarmed; if he resists, there should be a length of rope handy wherewith to tie his hands behind his back. But otherwise I’ll not have him hurt. Understand?”</p>
			<p>“Perfectly, my lord,” the equerry gave answer. “ ’Tis simple enough.”</p>
			<p class="cpb">5.</p>
			<p>Now the two friends⁠—brothers in crime⁠—were alone in the vast, panelled hall.</p>
			<p>Nicolaes had said nothing, made no movement of indignation or protest, when the other delivered his monstrous and treacherous commands against the personal liberty of the burgomaster. He had sat sullen and glowering, his head resting against his hand.</p>
			<p>Stoutenburg looked down on him for a moment or two, his deep-set eyes full of that contempt which he felt for this weak-kneed and conscience-plagued waverer. Then he curtly advised him to leave the room.</p>
			<p>“You might not think it seemly,” he remarked with a sneer, “to be present when I take certain preventive measures against your father. These measures are necessary, else I would not take them. You would not have him spitting some of our men, or mayhap do himself or Gilda some injury, would you?”</p>
			<p>“I was not complaining,” Nicolaes retorted dryly.</p>
			<p>Indeed, he obeyed readily enough. Now that the time had come to meet his father, he shrank from the ordeal with horror. It would have come, of course; but, like all weak natures, Nicolaes was always on the side of procrastination. He rose without another word, and, avoiding the main door of the banqueting-hall, he went out by the back one, which gave on a narrow antechamber and thence on the service staircase.</p>
			<p>“I’ll remain in the ante-chamber,” he said. “Call me when you wish.”</p>
			<p>Stoutenburg shrugged his shoulders. He was glad to remain alone for awhile⁠—alone with that wealth of memories which would not be chased away. Memories of childhood, of adolescence, of youth untainted with crime; of love, before greed and ambition had caused him to betray so basely the girl who had believed in him.</p>
			<p>“If Gilda had remained true to me,” he sighed, with almost cynical inconsequence, exacting fidelity where he had given none. “If she had stuck to me that night in Haarlem everything would have been different.”</p>
			<p>He went up to the open window, and, leaning his arm against the mullion, he gazed upon the busy scene below. The current of cold, humid air appeared to do him good. His arquebusiers and pikemen, bivouacking round the spluttering fires, striving to keep the damp air out of their stiffening limbs; the shouts, the songs, the peremptory calls; the shrieks of frightened women and children; the loud Spanish oaths; the medley of curses in every tongue⁠—all this confused din pertaining to strife seemed to work like a tonic upon his brooding spirit. A blind beggar soliciting alms among the soldiery chased all softer thoughts away.</p>
			<p>“Hey, there!” he shouted fiercely, to one of the soldiers who happened just then to have caught his eye, “Have I not given orders that every blind beggar lurking around the city be hung to the nearest tree?”</p>
			<p>The men laughed. A monstrously tyrannical order such as that suited their present mood.</p>
			<p>“But this one was inside the city, so please your Magnificence,” one of them protested with a cynical laugh, “when we arrived.”</p>
			<p>“All the more reason why he should be hung forthwith!” Stoutenburg riposted savagely in reply.</p>
			<p>A loud guffaw greeted this inhuman order. His Magnificence was loudly cheered, his health drunk in deep goblets of stolen wine. Then a search was made for the blind beggar. But he, luckily for himself, had in the meanwhile taken to his heels.</p>
			<p class="cpb">6.</p>
			<p>The next moment a slight noise behind him caused the Lord of Stoutenburg to turn on his heel. The door had been thrown open, and the burgomaster, having his daughter on his arm, stood upon the threshold. He was dressed in his robes of office, with black cloak and velvet bonnet; but he wore a steel gorget round his neck and rapier by his side.</p>
			<p>At the sight of his arch enemy, he had paused under the lintel, and the ashen pallor of his cheeks became more marked. But he had no time to move, for in an instant Jan and three or four men were all around him.</p>
			<p>At this treacherous onslaught a fierce oath escaped Beresteyn’s lips. In an instant his sword was out of its scabbard, he himself at bay, covering Gilda with his body, and facing the men who had thus scurrilously rushed on him out of the gloom.</p>
			<p>But obviously resistance was futile. Already he was surrounded and disarmed, Gilda torn forcibly away from him, thrust into a corner, whilst he himself was rendered helpless, even though he fought and struggled magnificently. The whole unequal combat had only lasted a few seconds; and now the grand old man stood like a fettered lion, glowering and defiant, his hands tied behind his back with a length of rope, against which he was straining with all his might.</p>
			<p>One of the most disloyal pitfalls ever devised against an unsuspecting civilian⁠—and he the chief dignitary of a peace-loving city. Stoutenburg watched the scene with an evil glitter in his restless eyes. Shame and compunction did, in truth, bear no part in his emotions at this moment. He was exulting in the thought of his vile stratagem, pleased that he had thought of enticing Gilda hither by summoning her father at the same time. It was amusing to watch them both⁠—the burgomaster still dignified, despite his helplessness, and Gilda beautiful in her indignation. By <abbr>St.</abbr> Bavon, the girl was lovely, and still desirable. And thank Beelzebub and all the powers of darkness who lent their aid in placing so exquisite a prize in the hands of the conqueror.</p>
			<p>Stoutenburg could have laughed aloud with glee. As it was, he made an effort to appear both masterful and indifferent. He knew that he could take his time, that any scheme which he might formulate for his own advancement and the satisfaction of his every ambition was now certain of success. The future was entirely his, to plan and mould at will.</p>
			<p>So now he deliberately turned back to the window, closed it with a hand that had not the slightest tremor in it. Then he returned to the centre of the room, sat down beside the table, and took on a cool and judicial air. All his movements were consciously slow. He looked at the burgomaster and at Gilda with ostentatious irony, remained silent for awhile as if in pleasant contemplation of their helplessness. “You are in suspense,” his silence seemed to express. “You know that your fate is in my hands. But I can afford to wait, to take mine ease. I am lord of the future, and you are little better than my slaves.”</p>
			<p>“Was it not foolishness to resist, mynheer?” he said at last, in a tone of gentle mockery. “Bloodshed, eh? In truth, the role of fire-eater ill becomes your dignity and your years.”</p>
			<p>“Spare me your insults, my lord,” Beresteyn retorted, with calm dignity. “What is your pleasure with my daughter and with me?”</p>
			<p>“I will tell you anon,” Stoutenburg replied coolly, “when you are more composed.”</p>
			<p>“I am ready now to hear your commands.”</p>
			<p>“Quite submissive, eh?” the other retorted with a sneer.</p>
			<p>“No; only helpless, and justly indignant at this abominable outrage.”</p>
			<p>“Also surprised⁠—what?⁠—at seeing me here to-night?”</p>
			<p>“In truth, my lord, I had not expected to see the son of Olden Barneveldt at the head of enemy troops.”</p>
			<p>“Or <i>your</i> son in his train, eh?”</p>
			<p>The burgomaster winced at the taunt. But he rejoined quite simply:</p>
			<p>“If what rumour says is true, my lord, then I have no son.”</p>
			<p>“If,” Stoutenburg retorted dryly, “rumour told you that Nicolaes Beresteyn hath returned to his allegiance, then the jade did not lie. Your son, mynheer, hath shown you which way loyalty lies. Not in the service of a rebel prince, but in that of Archduchess Isabella, our Sovereign Liege.”</p>
			<p>He paused, as if expecting some word of reply from the burgomaster; but as the latter remained silent, he went on more lightly:</p>
			<p>“But enough of this. Whether you, Mynheer Beresteyn, and your son do make up your differences presently is no concern of mine. You will see him anon, no doubt, and can then discuss your family affairs at your leisure. For the nonce, I do desire to know whether your city intends to be submissive. I have exercised great leniency up to this hour; but you must remember that I am equally ready to punish at the slightest sign of contumely or of resistance to my commands.”</p>
			<p>“For the leniency to which the Lord of Stoutenburg lays claim,” Beresteyn rejoined with perfect dignity, “in that, up to this hour he has not murdered our peaceful citizens, burned down our houses, or violated our homes, we tender him our thanks. As for the future, the treacherous pitfall into which I have fallen, and the unwarrantable treatment that is meted out to me, will mayhap prove to my unfortunate fellow-citizens that resistance to overwhelming force is worse than useless.”</p>
			<p>“Excellent sentiments, mynheer!” Stoutenburg retorted. “Dictated, I make no doubt, by one who knows the usages of war.”</p>
			<p>“We do all of us,” the burgomaster gave quiet answer, “obey the behests of our Stadtholder, our Sovereign Liege.”</p>
			<p>“The rebel prince, mynheer, who, by commanding you to submit, hath for once gauged rightly the temper of the Sovereign whom he hath outraged. Will you tell me, I pray you,” Stoutenburg added, with a sardonic grin, “whether the <i>jongejuffrouw</i> your daughter is equally prepared to obey Maurice of Nassau’s behests and submit to my commands?”</p>
			<p>At this cruel thrust an almost imperceptible change came over the burgomaster’s calm, dignified countenance; and even this change was scarce noticeable in the uncertain, flickering light of the wax candles. Perhaps he had realized, for the first time, the full horror of his position, the full treachery of the snare which had been laid for him, and which left him, pinioned and helpless, at the mercy of an unscrupulous and cowardly enemy. Not only him, but also his daughter.</p>
			<p>A groan like that of a wounded beast escaped his lips, and his powerful arms and shoulders strained at the cords that fettered him. Nevertheless, after a very brief moment of silence he rejoined with perfect outward calm:</p>
			<p>“My daughter, my lord, was under my protection until vile treachery rendered me helpless. Now that her father can no longer watch over her, she is under the protection of every man of honour.”</p>
			<p>“That is excellently said, mynheer,” Stoutenburg replied. “And in a few words you have put the whole situation tersely and clearly. You have orders from the Stadtholder to obey my commands; therefore I do but make matters easier for you by having you removed to your apartments, instead of merely commanding you to return thither⁠—an order which, if you were free, you might have been inclined to disobey.”</p>
			<p>“A truce on your taunts, my lord!” broke in the burgomaster firmly. “What is your pleasure with us?”</p>
			<p>“Just what I have had the honour to tell you,” Stoutenburg replied coolly. “That you return forthwith to your apartments.”</p>
			<p>“But my daughter, my lord?”</p>
			<p>“She sups here, with her brother Nicolaes and with me.”</p>
			<p>“ ’Tis only my dead body you’ll drag away from here,” the burgomaster rejoined quietly.</p>
			<p>Once more Stoutenburg broke into that harsh, mirthless laugh which had become habitual to him and which seemed to find its well-spring in the bitterness of his soul.</p>
			<p>“Fine heroics, mynheer!” he said derisively. “But useless, I fear me, and quite unnecessary. Were I to assure you that your daughter hath ceased to rouse the slightest passion in my heart or to stir my senses in any way, you would mayhap not credit me. Yet such is the case. The <i>jongejuffrouw</i>, I’ll have you believe, will be as safe with me as would the ugliest old hag out of the street.”</p>
			<p>“Nevertheless, my lord,” Beresteyn rejoined with calm dignity, “whilst I live I remain by my daughter’s side.”</p>
			<p>Stoutenburg shrugged his shoulders.</p>
			<p>“Jan,” he called, “take mynheer the burgomaster back to his apartments. I have no further use for him.”</p>
			<p class="cpb">7.</p>
			<p>Mynheer Beresteyn was still a comparatively young and vigorous man. In his day, he had been counted one of the finest soldiers in the armies of the Prince of Orange, and had accomplished prodigies of skill and valour at Turnhout and Ostend. The feeling that at this moment, when he would have given his life to protect his daughter, he was absolutely helpless, was undoubtedly the most cruel blow he had ever had to endure at the hands of Fate. His eyes, pathetic in their mute appeal for forgiveness, sought those of Gilda. She had remained perfectly still all this while, silent in the dark corner whither Jan and the soldiers had thrust her at their first onslaught on the burgomaster. But she had watched the whole scene with ever-increasing horror, not at thought of herself, of her own danger, only of her father and all that he must be suffering. Now her one idea was to reassure him, to ease the burden of sorrow and of wrath which his own impotence must have laid upon his brave soul.</p>
			<p>Before any of the men could stop her, she had evaded them. Swift and furtive as a tiny lizard, she had wormed her way between them to her father’s side. Now she had her arms round his neck, her head against his breast.</p>
			<p>“Do not be anxious because of me, father dear,” she whispered under her breath. “God hath us all in His keeping. Have no fear for me.”</p>
			<p>A deep groan escaped the old man’s breast. His eyes, fierce and indignant, rested with an expression of withering contempt upon his enemy.</p>
			<p>“Jan,” Stoutenburg broke in harshly, “didst not hear my commands?”</p>
			<p>Four pairs of hands immediately closed upon the burgomaster. He, like a creature at bay, started to struggle.</p>
			<p>“Some one knock that old fool on the head!” his lordship shouted with a fierce oath.</p>
			<p>And Jan raised his fist, overwilling to obey. But, with a loud cry of indignation, Gilda had already interposed. She seized the man’s wrist with her own small hands and turned flaming eyes upon Stoutenburg.</p>
			<p>“Violence is unnecessary, my lord,” she said, vainly striving to speak coolly and firmly. “My father will go quietly, and I will remain here to listen to what you have to say.”</p>
			<p>“Bravely spoken!” Stoutenburg rejoined with a sneer. “And you, Mynheer Beresteyn, would do well to learn wisdom at so fair a source. You and your precious daughter will come to no harm if you behave like reasonable beings. There is such a thing,” he added cynically, “as submitting to the inevitable.”</p>
			<p>“Do not trust him, Gilda,” the old man cried. “False to his country, false to his wife and kindred, every word which he utters is a lie or a blasphemy.”</p>
			<p>“Enough of this wrangle,” Stoutenburg exclaimed, wrathful and hoarse. “Jan, take that ranting dotard away!”</p>
			<p>Then it was that, just before the men had time to close in all round the burgomaster, Gilda, placing one small, white hand upon her father’s arm, pointed with the other to the door at the far end of the room. Instinctively the old man’s glance turned in that direction. The door was open, and Nicolaes stood upon the threshold. He had heard his father’s voice, Stoutenburg’s brutal commands, his sister’s cry of indignation.</p>
			<p>“Nicolaes is here, father dear,” Gilda said simply. “God knows that he is naught but an abominable traitor, yet methinks that even he hath not fallen so low as to see his own sister harmed before his eyes.”</p>
			<p>At sight of his son an indefinable look had spread over the burgomaster’s face. It seemed as if an invisible and ghostly hand had drawn a filmy grey veil all over it. And a strange hissing sound⁠—the intaking of a laboured sigh⁠—burst through his tightly set lips.</p>
			<p>“Go!” he cried to his son, in a dull, toneless voice, which nevertheless could be heard, clear and distinct as a bell, from end to end of the vast hall. “A father’s curse is potent yet, remember!”</p>
			<p>Nicolaes broke into a forced and defiant laugh, tried to assume a jaunty, careless air, which ill agreed with his pallid face and wild, scared eyes. But, before he could speak, Jan and the soldiers had finally seized the burgomaster and forcefully dragged him out of the room.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
