<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>X: A Prince of Darkness</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Prince of Darkness</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="chapter-10-1" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>Gilda had seen her father dragged away from her side without a tear. Whatever tremor of apprehension made her heart quiver after she had seen the last of him, she would not allow these two men to see.</p>
				<p>She was not afraid. When a woman has suffered as Gilda had suffered during these past two days, there is no longer in her any room for fear. Not for physical fear, at any rate. All her thoughts, her hopes, her anxieties were concentrated on the probable fate of her beloved. That unerring instinct which comes to human beings when they are within measurable distance of some acute, unknown danger amounts at times to second sight. This was the case with Gilda. With the eyes of her soul she could see and read something of what went on in her enemy’s tortuous brain. She could see that he knew something about her beloved, and that he meant to use that knowledge for his own abominable ends. What these were she could not divine. Prescience did not go quite so far. But it had served her in this, that when her father was taken away she had just sufficient time and strength of will to brace herself up for the ordeal which was to come.</p>
				<p>It is always remarkable when a woman, young and brought up in comparative seclusion and ignorance, is able to face moral danger with perfect calm and cool understanding. It was doubly remarkable in the case of a young girl like Gilda. She was only just twenty, had been the idol of her father; motherless, she had no counsels from those of her own sex, and there are always certain receptacles in a woman’s soul which she will never reveal to the most loving, most indulgent father.</p>
				<p>Three months ago, this same absolutely innocent, unsophisticated girl had suddenly been confronted with the vehement, turbulent passions of men. She had seen them in turmoil all round her⁠—love, hatred, vengeance, treachery⁠—she herself practically the pivot around which they raged. Out of the deadly strife she had emerged pure, happy in the arms of the man whom her wondrous adventures as much as his brilliant personality had taught her to love.</p>
				<p>Since then her life had been peaceful and happy. She had allowed herself to be worshipped by that strangely captivating lover of hers, whose passionately wilful temperament, tempered by that persistent, sunny gaiety she had up to now only half understood. He made her laugh always made her taste a strange and exquisite bliss when he held her in his arms. But withal she had up till now kept an indulgent smile in reserve for his outbursts of vehemence, for his wayward, ofttimes irascible moods, his tearing impatience when she was away from him. Her love for him in the past had been almost motherly in its tenderness.</p>
				<p>Somehow, with his absence, with the danger which threatened him, all that had become changed, intensified. The tenderness was still in her heart for him, an exquisite tenderness which caused her sheer physical ache now, when her mind conjured up that brief vision which she had had of him yesterday morning, wearied, with shoulders bent, his face haggard above a three-day’s growth of beard, his eyes red-rimmed and sunken. But with that tenderness there was mingled at this hour a feeling which was akin to fierceness⁠—the primeval desire of the woman to defend and protect her beloved⁠—that same tearing impatience with Fate, of which he had been wont to suffer, for keeping him away from her sheltering arms.</p>
				<p>Oh, she understood his vehemence now! No longer could she smile at his fretfulness. She, too, was a prey at this hour to a wildly emotional mood, tempest-tossed and spirit-stirring; her very soul crying out for him. And she hated⁠—ay, hated with an intensity which she herself scarcely could apprise⁠—this man whom she knew to be his deadly enemy.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-10-2" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>“Sit down, sister; you are overwrought.”</p>
				<p>Nicolaes’ cool, casual words brought her straightway back to reality. Quietly, mechanically she took the seat which he was offering⁠—a high-backed, velvet-covered chair⁠—the one in which the Stadtholder had sat at her wedding feast. She closed her eyes, and sat for a moment or two quite still. Visions of joy and of happiness must not obtrude their softly insidious presence beside the stern demands of the moment. Stoutenburg brought a footstool, and placed it to her feet. She felt him near her, but would not look on him, and he remained for awhile on his knees close beside her, she unable to move away from him.</p>
				<p>“How beautiful you are!” he murmured, under his breath.</p>
				<p>Her hand was resting on the arm of her chair. She felt his lips upon it, and quickly drew it back, wiping it against her gown as if a slimy worm had left its trail upon her fingers Seeing which, he broke into a savage curse and jumped to his feet.</p>
				<p>“I thank you for the reminder, <span xml:lang="nl">mejuffrouw</span>,” he said coldly.</p>
				<p>After which he sat down once more beside the long centre table, at some little distance from her, but so that the light from the candles fell upon her dainty figure, graceful and dignified against the background of the velvet-covered chair, the while his own face remained in shadow. Nicolaes, nervous and restless, was pacing up and down the room.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-10-3" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>“Allow me, <span xml:lang="nl">mejuffrouw</span>,” Stoutenburg began coolly after awhile, “to tender you my sincere regrets for the violence to which necessity alone compelled me to subject the burgomaster; a worthy man, for whom, believe me, I entertain naught but sincere regard.”</p>
				<p>“I pray you, my lord,” she retorted with complete self-possession, “to spare me this mockery. Had you not determined to put an insult on me, an insult which, apparently, you dared not formulate in the presence of my father. You had not, of a certainty subjected him to such an outrage.”</p>
				<p>“You misunderstand my motives, <span xml:lang="nl">mejuffrouw</span>. There was, and is, no intention on my part to insult you. Surely, as you yourself very rightly said just now, your brother’s presence is sufficient guarantee for that.”</p>
				<p>“I said that, in order to quieten my father’s fears. The treacherous snare which you laid for him, my lord, is proof enough of your cowardly intentions.”</p>
				<p>“You do yourself no good, <span xml:lang="nl">mejuffrouw</span>,” rejoined the lord of Stoutenburg harshly, “by acrimony or defiance. I had to lure your father hither, else he would not have allowed you to come. Violence to you⁠—though you may not believe it⁠—would be repellent to me. But, having got you both here, I had to rid myself of him, using what violence was necessary.”</p>
				<p>“And why, I pray you, had you, as you say, to rid yourself of my father? Were you afraid of him?”</p>
				<p>“No,” he replied; “but I am compelled to put certain matters before you for your consideration, and did not desire that you should be influenced by him.”</p>
				<p>A quick sigh of satisfaction⁠—or was it excitement?⁠—escaped her breast. Fretful of all these preliminaries, which she felt were but the opening gambits of his dangerous game, she was thankful that, at last, he was coming to the point.</p>
				<p>“Let us begin, <span xml:lang="nl">mejuffrouw</span>,” Stoutenburg resumed, after a moment’s deliberation, “by assuring you that the whereabouts of that gallant stranger who goes by the name of Diogenes are known to me and to your brother Nicolaes. To no one else.”</p>
				<p>He watched her keenly while he spoke. Shading his eyes with his hand, he took in every transient line of her face, noted the pallor of her cheeks, the pathetic droop of the mouth. But he was forced to own that at that curt announcement, wherewith he had intended to startle and to hurt, not the slightest change came over her. She still sat there, cool and impassive, her head resting against the velvet cushion of the chair, the flickering light of the candle playing with the loose tendrils of her golden hair. Her eyes he could not see, for they were downcast, veiled by the delicate, blue-veined lids; but of a surety, not the slightest quiver marred the perfect stillness of her lips.</p>
				<p>In truth, she had expected some such statement from that execrable traitor. Her intuition had not erred when it told her that, in some subtle, devilish way, he would use the absence of her beloved as a tool wherewith to gain what he had in view. Now what she realized most vividly was that she must not let him see that she was afraid. Not even let him guess if she were hurt. She must keep up a semblance of callousness before her enemy for as long as she could. With her self-control, she would lose her most efficacious weapon. Therefore, for the next minute or two, she dared not trust herself to speak, lest her voice, that one uncontrollable thing, betrayed her.</p>
				<p>“I await your answer, <span xml:lang="nl">mejuffrouw</span>,” Stoutenburg resumed impatiently, after awhile.</p>
				<p>“You have asked me no question, my lord,” she rejoined simply. “Only stated a fact. I but wait to hear your further pleasure.”</p>
				<p>“My pleasure, fair one,” he went on lightly, “is only to prove to you that I, as ever before, am not only your humble slave but also your sincere friend.”</p>
				<p>“A difficult task, my lord. But let me see, without further preamble, I pray you, how you intend to set about it.”</p>
				<p>“By trying to temper your sorrow with my heartfelt sympathy,” he murmured softly.</p>
				<p>“My sorrow?”</p>
				<p>“I am forced to impart sad news to you, alas!”</p>
				<p>“My husband is dead?” The cry broke from her heart, and this time she was unable to check it. Will and pride had been easy enough at first. Oh, how easy! But not now. Not in the face of this! She would have given worlds to appear calm, incredulous. But how could she? How could she, when such a torturing vision had been conjured up before her eyes?</p>
				<p>For a moment it seemed as if reason itself began to totter. She looked on the man before her, and he appeared like a ghoulish fiend, with grinning jaws and sinister eyes, the play of light behind him making his face appear black and hideous. She put her hands up to her face, closed her eyes, and, oh, Heaven, how she prayed for strength!</p>
				<p>None indeed but an implacable enemy, a jealous suitor, could have seen such soul-agony without relenting. But Stoutenburg was one of those hard natures which found grim pleasure in wounding and torturing. His love for Gilda, intensely passionate but never tender, was nothing now but fierce desire for mastership of her and vengeance upon his successful rival. The girl’s involuntary cry of misery had been as balm to his evil soul. Now her hands dropped once more on her lap. She looked at him straight between the eyes, her own still a little wild, lit by a feverish brightness.</p>
				<p>“You have killed him,” she said huskily. “Is that it? Answer me! You have killed him?”</p>
				<p>He put up his hand, smiling, as if to soothe a crying child.</p>
				<p>“Nay! On my honour!” he replied quietly. “I have not seen that gallant adventurer these three months past.”</p>
				<p>“Well, then?”</p>
				<p>“Ask your brother Nicolaes, fair one. He saw him but a few hours ago.”</p>
				<p>“Ay, yesterday,” she retorted. “When he tried to assassinate him. I saw the murderous hand uplifted; I saw it all I tell you! And in my heart I cursed my only brother for the vile traitor that he is. But, thank Heaven, my lord was only hurt. I believe⁠—”</p>
				<p>She paused, put her hand up to her throat. The glance in Stoutenburg’s eyes gave her a feeling as if she were about to choke.</p>
				<p>“You are quite right, <span xml:lang="nl">mejuffrouw</span>,” he broke in drily, “in believing that the intrepid Englishman who, for reasons best known to himself, hath chosen to meddle in the affairs of this country⁠—that he, I say, was only hurt when your brother interposed yesterday betwixt him and the Stadtholder. The two ragamuffins who usually hang around him did probably save him from further punishment at the moment. But not altogether. Nicolaes will tell you that, half an hour later, that same intrepid and meddlesome English gentleman did once more try to interfere in the affairs of our Sovereign Liege the Archduchess Isabella. This time with serious consequences to himself.”</p>
				<p>“My brother Nicolaes,” she murmured, more quietly this time, “hath killed my husband?”</p>
				<p>“No, no!” here broke in Nicolaes at last. “The whole thing, I vow, was the result of an accident.”</p>
				<p>“What whole thing?” she reiterated slowly. “I pray you to be more explicit. What hath happened to my husband?”</p>
				<p>“The explosion of a pistol,” Nicolaes stammered, shamed out of his defiance at seeing his sister’s misery, yet angered with himself for this weakness. “He is not dead, I swear!”</p>
				<p>“Maimed?” she asked.</p>
				<p>“Blind,” Nicolaes replied, “but otherwise well. I swear it!” he protested, shutting his ears to Stoutenburg’s scornful laugh, his eyes to the other’s sardonic grin, his miserably weak nature swaying like a pendulum ’twixt his ambition, his hatred of the once brilliant soldier of fortune, and his dormant tenderness for the sweet and innocent sister to whom his treacherous hand had dealt such a devilish blow.</p>
				<p>There was silence in the room now. Gilda had uttered no cry when that same blow fell on her like a crash. It had seemed to snap the very threads that held her to life. One sigh, and one only, came through her lips, like the dying call of a wounded bird. All feeling, all emotion, seemed suddenly to have died out of her, leaving her absolutely numb, scarcely conscious, with wide, unseeing eyes staring straight out before her, striving to visualize that splendid creature, that embodiment of gaiety, of laughter, of careless insouciance, stricken with impotence; those merry, twinkling eyes sightless. The horror of it was so appalling that it placed her for the moment beyond the power of suffering. She was not a human being now at all; she had no soul, no body, no life. Her senses had ceased to be. She neither saw nor heard nor felt. She was just a thing, a block of insentient stone into which life would presently begin to trickle slowly, bringing with it a misery such as could not be endured even by lost souls in hell.</p>
				<p>How the time went by she did not know.</p>
				<p>Just before this awful thing had happened she had chanced to look at the clock. It was then five minutes to eight. But all this was in the past. She no longer heard the ticking of the clock, nor her enemy’s laboured breathing, nor Nicolaes’ shuffling footsteps at the far end of the room. Fortunately, she could not see the triumph, the ominous sparkle, which glittered in Stoutenburg’s eyes. He knew well enough what she suffered, or would be suffering anon when consciousness would return. Knew and revelled in it. He was like those inquisitors, the unclean spirits that waited on Spanish tyranny, who found their delight in watching the agony of their victims on the rack; who treasured every groan, exulted over every cry, wrung by unendurable bodily pain. Only with him it was the moral agony of those whom he desired to master that caused him infinite bliss. His stygian nature attained a demoniacal satisfaction out of the mental torture which he was able to inflict.</p>
				<p>It is an undoubted fact that even the closest scrutiny of contemporary chronicles has failed to bring to light a single redeeming feature in this man’s character, and all that the most staunch supporters of the Barneveldt family can bring forward in mitigation of Stoutenburg’s crimes is the fact that his whole soul had been warped by the judicial murder of his father and of his elder brother, by his own consequent sufferings and those of his unfortunate mother.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-10-4" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>“You will, I hope, <span xml:lang="nl">mejuffrouw</span>, give me the credit of having tried to break this sad news to you as gently as I could.”</p>
				<p>The words, spoken in smooth, silky tones were the first sounds that reached Gilda’s returning perceptions. What had occurred in between she had not the vaguest idea. She certainly was still sitting in the same chair, with that sinister creature facing her, and her brother Nicolaes skulking somewhere in the gloom. The fire was still cracking in the hearth, the clock still ticking with insentient monotony. A tiny fillet of air caused the candlelight to flicker, and sent a thin streak of smoke upwards in an ever-widening spiral.</p>
				<p>That streak of smoke was the first thing that Gilda saw. It arrested her eyes, brought her back slowly to consciousness. Then came Stoutenburg’s hypocritical tirade. Her senses were returning one by one. She even glanced up at the clock. It marked three minutes before eight. Only two minutes had gone by. One hundred and twenty seconds. And they appeared longer than the most phantasmagoric conception of eternity. Two minutes! And she realized that she was alive, that she could feel, and that her beloved was sightless. Was it at all strange that, with return to pulsating life, there should arise within her that indestructible attribute of every human heart⁠—a faint germ of hope?</p>
				<p>When first the awful truth was put before her by her bitterest foe, she had not been conscious of the slightest feeling of doubt. Nicolaes’ stammering protests, his obvious desire to minimise his own share of responsibility, had all helped to confirm the revelation of a hideous crime.</p>
				<p>“He is not dead, I swear!” and “He is not otherwise hurt!” which broke from the dastard’s quaking lips at the moment, had left no room for doubt or hope. At least, so she thought. And even now that faint ray of light in the utter blackness of her misery was too elusive to be of any comfort. But it helped her to collect herself, to look those two craven miscreants in the face. Nicolaes obviously dared not meet her glance, but Stoutenburg kept his eyes fixed upon her, and the look of triumph in them whipped up her dormant pride.</p>
				<p>And now, when his double-tongued Pharisaism reached her ear, she swallowed her dread, bade horror be stilled. She knew that he was about to place an “either⁠—or” before her which would demand her full understanding, and all the strength of mind and body that she could command. The fate of her beloved was about to be dangled before her, and she would be made to choose⁠—what?</p>
				<p>“You began, my lord,” she said, with something of her former assurance⁠—and God alone knew what it cost her to speak⁠—“by saying that you desired to place certain matters before me for my consideration. I have not yet heard, remember, what those matters are.”</p>
				<p>“True⁠—true!” he rejoined, with hypocritical unction. “But I felt it my duty⁠—my sad duty, I may say⁠—”</p>
				<p>“A truce on this hollow mockery!” she riposted. “I pray you, come to the point.”</p>
				<p>“The point is, fair one, that both Nicolaes and I desire to compass your welfare,” he retorted blandly.</p>
				<p>“This you can do best at this hour, my lord, by allowing me to return to the privacy of mine apartments.”</p>
				<p>“So you shall, <i xml:lang="nl">myn engel</i>⁠—so you shall,” he rejoined suavely. “You will need time to prepare for departure.”</p>
				<p>She frowned, puzzled this time.</p>
				<p>“For departure?” she asked, a little bewildered.</p>
				<p>“I leave this town tomorrow at the head of my troops.”</p>
				<p>“Thank God for that!” she rejoined earnestly.</p>
				<p>“And you, <span xml:lang="nl">mejuffrouw</span>,” he added curtly, “will accompany us.”</p>
				<p>“I?” she asked, not altogether understanding, the frown more deeply marked between her brows.</p>
				<p>“Methought I spoke clearly,” he went on, in his habitual harsh, peremptory tone. “I only came to this town in order to fetch you, <i xml:lang="nl">myn engel</i>. Tomorrow we go away together.”</p>
				<p>“The folly of human grandeur hath clouded your brain, my lord!” she said coldly.</p>
				<p>“In what way?” he queried, still perfectly bland and mild.</p>
				<p>“You know well that I would sooner die than follow you.”</p>
				<p>“I know well that most women are over-ready with heroics. But,” he added, with a shrug of the shoulders, “these tantrums usually leave me cold. You are an intelligent woman, <span xml:lang="nl">mejuffrouw</span>, and you have seen your valiant father resign himself to the inevitable.”</p>
				<p>“I pray you waste no words, my lord,” she rejoined coolly. “Three months ago, when at Ryswick, your crimes found you out, and you strove to involve me in your own disgrace and ruin, I gave you mine answer⁠—the same that I do now. My dead body you can take with you, but I, alive, will never follow you!”</p>
				<p>“ ’Twas different then,” he retorted, with a cynical smile. “You had a fortune-hunting adventurer to hand who was determined to see that your father’s shekels did not lightly escape his grasp. Today⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Today,” she retorted, and rose to her feet, fronted him now, superb with indignation, “he is sightless, absent, impotent, you would say, to protect me against your villainy! You miserable, slinking cur!”</p>
				<p>Stoutenburg’s harsh, forced laugh broke in upon her wrath.</p>
				<p>“Ah!” he exclaimed lightly. “You little spitfire! In very truth, I like you better in that mood. Heroics do not become you, <i xml:lang="nl">myn schat</i>, and they are so unnecessary. Did you perchance imagine that it was love for you that hath influenced my decision to take you away from here?”</p>
				<p>“I pray God, my lord, that I be not polluted by as much as a thought from you!”</p>
				<p>“Your prayers have been granted, fair one,” he retorted with a sneer. “ ’Tis but seldom I think of you now, save as an exquisite little termagant whom it will amuse me to tame. But this is by the way. That pleasure will lose nothing by procrastination. You know me well enough by now to realise that I am not likely to be lenient with you after your vixenish treatment of me. For the nonce, I pray you to keep a civil tongue in your head,” he added roughly. “On your conduct at this hour will depend your future comfort. Nicolaes will not always be skulking in dark corners, ready to interfere if my manner become too rough.”</p>
				<p>“He is here now,” she said boldly, “and if there is a spark of honour left in him he will conduct me to my rooms!”</p>
				<p>With this she turned and walked steadily across the room. Even so his harsh laugh accompanied her as far as the door. When her hand was upon the knob, he called lightly after her:</p>
				<p>“The moment you step cross the threshold, <i xml:lang="nl">myn schat</i>, Jan will bring you back here⁠—in his arms!”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-10-5" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>Instinctively she paused, realizing that the warning had come just in time⁠—that the next moment, in very truth, she would be in the hands of those vile traitors who were there ready to obey their master’s every command. She paused, too, in order to murmur a quick prayer for Divine guidance, seeing that human protection was denied her at this hour. What could she do? She was like a bird caught in a snare from which there seemed to be no issue. Stoutenburg’s sneering laugh rang in her ear. He was beside her now, took her hand from the knob and held it for a moment forcibly in his. His glance, charged with cruel mockery, took in every line of her pallid face.</p>
				<p>“Heroics again, fair one!” he said, with an impish grin. “Must I assure you once more that you are perfectly safe with me? See, if you were in danger from me, would not your brother interfere? Bah! Nicolaes knows well enough that passion doth not enter into my schemes at this hour. My plans are too vast to be swayed by your frowns or your smiles. I have entered this city as a conqueror. As a conqueror I shall go out of it tomorrow, and you will come with me. I shall go hence because I choose, and for reasons which I will presently make clear to you.</p>
				<p>“But you shall come with me. When you are with me in my camp, I may honour you as my future wife, or cast you from me as I would a beggar. That will depend on my mood, and upon your temper. Nicolaes will not be there to run counter to my will. Therefore, understand me, my pretty fire-eater, that from this hour forth you are as absolutely my property as my dogs are, my horse, or the boots which I wear. I am the master here,” he concluded with strangely sinister calm, “And my will alone is law.”</p>
				<p>“A law unto yourself,” she retorted, faced him with absolute composure, neither defiant nor afraid, her nerves quiescent, her voice perfectly steady, “and mayhap unto your cringing sycophants. But above your will, my lord, is that of God; and neither death nor life are your slaves.”</p>
				<p>“Ay! But methinks they are, <i xml:lang="nl">myn engel</i>,” he answered drily. “Yours in any case.”</p>
				<p>“No human being, my lord, can lose the freedom to die.”</p>
				<p>“You think not?” he sneered. “Well, we shall see.”</p>
				<p>He let go her hand, then quietly turned and walked to the window, threw open the casement once more, then beckoned to her. Strangely stirred, she followed, moved almost mechanically by something she could not resist.</p>
				<p>At a sign from him she looked out upon the busy scene on the quay below⁠—the enemy soldiers in possession, their bivouac fires, their comings and goings, the unfortunate citizens running hither and thither at their bidding, fetching and carrying, hustled, pushed, beaten, ordered about with rough words or the persuasive prod of pike or musket. A scene, alas, which already as a child had been familiar to her. A peaceable town in the hands of ruthless soldiery; the women fleeing from threatened insults, children clinging to their mother’s skirts, men standing by, grim and silent, not daring to protest lest mere resentment brought horrible reprisals upon the city.</p>
				<p>Gilda looked out for awhile in silence, her heart aching with the misery which she beheld, yet could not palliate. Then she turned coldly inquiring eyes on the prime mover of it all.</p>
				<p>“I have seen a reign of terror such as this before, my lord,” she said. “I was at Leyden, as you well know, and I have not forgotten.”</p>
				<p>“A reign of terror, you call it, <span xml:lang="nl">mejuffrouw</span>?” he retorted coolly. “Nay, you exaggerate. What is this brief occupation? Tomorrow we go, remember. Is there a single house demolished at this hour, a single citizen murdered? You are too young to recollect Malines of Ghent, the reign of Alva over these recalcitrant countries. I have been lenient so far. I have spared fire and sword. Amersfoort still stands. It will stand tomorrow, even after my soldiers have gone,” he went on speaking very slowly, “if⁠—”</p>
				<p>“If what, my Lord?” she asked, for he had paused.</p>
				<p>The moment had come, then, the supreme hour when that dreaded “either⁠—or” would be put before her. Even now he went on with that same sinister quietude which seemed like the voice of some relentless judge, sent by the King of Darkness to sway her destiny.</p>
				<p>“If,” Stoutenburg concluded drily, “you <span xml:lang="nl">mejuffrouw</span>, will accompany me. Oh,” he added quickly, seeing that at once she had resumed that air of defiance which irritated even whilst it amused him. “I do not mean as an unwilling slave, pinioned to my chariot-wheel or strapped into a saddle, nor yet as a picturesque corpse, with flowing hair and lilies ’twixt your lifeless hands. No, no, fair one! I offer you the safety of your native city, the immunity of your fellow-citizens, in exchange for a perfectly willing surrender of your live person into my charge.”</p>
				<p>She looked on him for awhile, mute with horror, then murmured slowly:</p>
				<p>“Are you a devil, that you should propose such an execrable bargain?”</p>
				<p>He laughed and shrugged his shoulders.</p>
				<p>“I am what you and my native land have made me,” he replied. “As to that, the Stadtholder never offered to bargain with me for my father’s life.”</p>
				<p>“Who but a prince of darkness would dream of doing so?” she retorted.</p>
				<p>“Call me that, an you wish, fair one,” he put in lightly; “and come back to the point.”</p>
				<p>“And the point is, my Lord?”</p>
				<p>“That I will respect this city if you come tomorrow, willing and submissive, with me.”</p>
				<p>“That, never!” she affirmed hotly.</p>
				<p>“In that case,” he riposted coldly, “my soldiers will have a free hand ere they quit the town, to sack it at their pleasure. Pillage, arson, will be rewarded; looting will be deemed a virtue, as will murder and outrage. Even your father⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Enough, my lord!” she exclaimed, with passionate indignation. “Tell me, I pray, which of the unclean spirits of Avernus did suggest this infamy to you?” Then, as he met her burning glance with another careless shrug and a mocking laugh, she turned to Nicolaes, and cried out to him, almost with entreaty: “Klaas! You at least are not a party to such hideous villainy!”</p>
				<p>But he, sullen and shamefaced, only threw her an angry look.</p>
				<p>“You make it very difficult for us, Gilda,” he said moodily, “by your stupid obstinacy.”</p>
				<p>“Obstinacy?” she retorted, puzzled at the word. Then reiterated it once or twice. “Obstinacy⁠—obstinacy? My God, hath the boy gone mad?”</p>
				<p>“What else is it but obstinacy?” he rejoined vehemently. “You know that, despite all he says, Stoutenburg hath never ceased to love you. And now that he is master here you are lucky indeed to have him as a suitor. He means well by you, by us all, else I were not here. Think what it would mean to me, to father, to everyone of us, if you were Stoutenburg’s wife. But you jeopardize my future and the welfare of us all by those foolish tantrums.”</p>
				<p>She gazed on him in utter horror⁠—on this brother whom she loved; could scarcely believe her ears that it was he⁠—really he⁠—who was uttering such odious words. She felt her gorge rising at this callous avowal of a wanton and insulting treachery. And he, feeling the contempt which flashed on him from her glowing eyes, avoided her glance, tried to shift his ground, to argue his point with the sophistry peculiar to a traitor, and sank more deeply every moment into the mire of dishonour.</p>
				<p>“It is time you realized, Gilda,” he said, “that our unfortunate country must sooner or later return to her true allegiance. The Stadtholder is sick. His arbitrary temper hath alienated some of his staunchest friends. The Netherlands are the unalienable property of Spain; though two rebel princes have striven to wrest them from their rightful master, the might of Spain was sure to be felt in the end. ’Twas folly ever to imagine that this so-called Dutch Republic would ever abide; and the hour, though tardy, has struck at last when such senseless dreams must come to an end.”</p>
				<p>“Well spoken, friend Nicolaes!” Stoutenburg put in lustily. “In verity, our Liege Lady the Archduchess Isabella, whom may God protect, could with difficulty find a more eloquent champion.”</p>
				<p>“Or our noble land so vile a traitor!” Gilda murmured, burning now with shame. “Thank Heaven, Nicolaes, that our poor father is not here, for the disgrace of it all would have struck him dead at your feet. Would to God,” she murmured under her breath, “that it killed me now!”</p>
				<p>“An undutiful prayer, <i xml:lang="nl">myn engel</i>,” Stoutenburg rejoined, “seeing that its fulfilment would mean that Amersfoort and her citizens would be wiped off the face of the earth.”</p>
				<p>This time he spoke quite quietly, without any apparent threat, only with determination, like one who knows that he is master and hath full powers to see his will obeyed. She looked at him keenly for a moment or two, wondering if she could make him flinch, if she could by word or prayer shake him in that devilish purpose which in truth must have found birth through the whisperings of uncanny fiends.</p>
				<p>Gilda gazed critically at his lean, hard face with the sunken, restless eyes that spoke so eloquently of disappointed hopes and frustrated ambitions; the mouth, thin-lipped and set; the unshaven chin; the hollow temples and grizzled hair. She took in every line of his tall, gaunt figure; the shoulders already bent, the hands fidgety and claw-like; the torn doublet and shabby boots, all proclaiming the down-at-heel adventurer who has staked his all⁠—honour, happiness, eternity⁠—for ambition; has staked all he possessed and played a losing game.</p>
				<p>But for pity or compunction Gilda sought in vain. The glance which after awhile was raised to hers revealed nothing but unholy triumph and a cruel, callous mockery. In truth, that glance had told her that she could expect neither justice nor mercy from him, and had spared her the humiliation of a desperate and futile appeal.</p>
				<p>A low moan escaped her lips. She tottered slightly, and felt her knees giving way under her.</p>
				<p>Vaguely she put out her hand, fearing that she might fall. Even so, she swayed backwards, feeling giddy and sick. But the dread of losing consciousness before this man whom she loathed and despised kept up both her courage and her endurance. She felt the panelling of the window-embrasure behind her, and leaned against it for support.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-10-6" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>Stoutenburg had made no effort to come to her assistance, neither had Nicolaes. Probably both of them knew that she would never allow either of them to touch her. But Stoutenburg’s mocking glance had pursued her all through her valiant fight against threatening unconsciousness. Now that she leaned against the framework of the window, pale and wraithlike, only her delicate profile vaguely distinguishable in the semi-gloom, her lips parted as if to drink in the cold evening air, she looked so exquisite, so desirable, that he allowed his admiration of her to override every other thought.</p>
				<p>“You are lovely, <i xml:lang="nl">myn schat</i>,” he said quietly. “Exquisite and worthy to be a queen. And, by Heaven,” he exclaimed with sudden passion, “you’ll yet live to bless this hour when I broke your obstinacy. Hand in hand, <i xml:lang="nl">myn engel</i>, you and I, we’ll be masters of this beautiful land. I feel that I could do great things if I had you by my side. Listen, Gilda,” he went on eagerly, thinking that because she remained silent and motionless she had given up the fight, and was at last resigned to the inevitable⁠—“listen, my beautiful little vixen! The Archduchess will wish to reward me for this; the capture of Amersfoort is no small matter, and I have further projects in mind. In the meanwhile, De Berg hath already hinted that she might reestablish the republic under the suzerainty of Spain, and appoint me as her Stadtholder. Think, <i xml:lang="nl">myn Geliefde</i>: think what a vista of glorious, satisfied ambition lies before us both! Nay, before us all. Your father, chief pensionary; Nicolaes, general of our armies; your family raised above everyone in the land. You’ll thank me, I say; thank me on your knees for my constancy and for my unwavering loyalty to you. And even tonight, presently, when you are quite calm and at rest, you’ll pray to your God, I vow, for His blessing upon your humble and devoted slave.”</p>
				<p>He bent the knee when he said this, still scornful even in this affectation of humility, and raised the hem of her gown to his lips. She did not look down on him, nor did she snatch her skirts out of his hand. She just stared straight out before her, and said slowly, with great deliberation:</p>
				<p>“Tonight⁠—presently⁠—when I am at rest⁠—I will pray God to kill you ere you put your monstrous threat into execution.”</p>
				<p>With a light laugh he jumped to his feet.</p>
				<p>“Still the shrewish little vixen, what?” he said carelessly. “Yet, see what a good dog I am. I’ll not bear resentment, and you shall have the comfort of your father’s company at the little supper party which I have prepared. Only the four of us, you and the burgomaster, and Nicolaes and I; and we can discuss the arrangements for our forthcoming wedding, which shall be magnificent, I promise you. But be sure of this, fair one,” he went on harshly, drew up his gaunt figure to its full height, “that what I’ve said I’ve said. Tomorrow at sunrise I go hence, and you come with me, able-bodied and willing, to a place which I have in mind. But this city will be the hostage for your good behaviour. My soldiers remain here under the command of one Jan, who obeys all my behests implicitly and without question, because he hates the Stadtholder as much as I do, and hath a father’s murder to avenge against that tyrant, just as I have. Jan will stay in Amersfoort until I bid him go. But at one word from me, this city will be reduced to ashes, and not one man, woman or child shall live to tell the tale of how the <span xml:lang="nl">jongejuffrouw</span> Gilda Beresteyn set her senseless obstinacy above the lives of thousands.</p>
				<p>“Think not that I’ll relent,” he concluded, and once more turned to the open window, gazed down upon the unfortunate city which he had marked as the means to his fiendish ends. His restless eyes roamed over the busy scene; his soldiers, his⁠—the executioners who would carry out his will! Never had he been so powerful; never had his ambition been so near its goal! It had all come together⁠—the humiliation of the Stadtholder, his own success in this daring enterprise, Gilda entirely at his mercy! Success had crowned all his nefarious schemes at last. “Nothing will change me from my purpose,” he said, with all the harsh determination which characterized his every action⁠—“nothing! Neither your tears nor your frowns nor your prayers. There is no one, understand me, no one who can stand between me and my resolve.”</p>
				<p>“No one but God,” she murmured under her breath. “Oh, God, protect me now! My God, save me from this!”</p>
				<p>Dizzy, moving like a sleepwalker, she tried to hold herself erect, tried to move from the window, and from the propinquity of that execrable miscreant.</p>
				<p>“Have I your permission to go now?” she murmured faintly.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” he replied; “to your father. I’ll order Jan to release our worthy burgomaster, and you and he can pray for my demise at your leisure. Whether you confide in him or not is no concern of mine. I would have you remember that my promise to respect this city and her inhabitants only holds good if you, of your own free will, come with me tomorrow. Amersfoort shall live if you come willingly. You are the best judge whether your father would be the happier for this knowledge. Methinks it would be kinder to let him think that you come tomorrow as my willing bride. But that is for you to decide. I want him here anon to give his blessing upon our future union in the presence of your brother Nicolaes. I wish the bond to be made irrevocable as soon as may be. If you or your father break it afterwards, it will be the worse for Amersfoort. Try and believe that the alternative is one of complete indifference to me. I have everything in the world now that I could possibly wish for. My ambition is completely satisfied. To have you as my wife would only be the pandering to a caprice. And now you may go, <i xml:lang="nl">myn schat</i>,” he concluded. “The destinies of your native city are in your dainty hands.”</p>
				<p>He watched her progress across the room with a sarcastic grin. But in his heart he was conscious of a bitter disappointment. Unheard by her, he muttered under his breath:</p>
				<p>“If only she would care, how different everything might be!”</p>
				<p>Aloud he called to Nicolaes: “Escort your sister, man, into the presence of the burgomaster! And see that Jan and a chosen few form a guard of honour on the passage of the future Lady of Stoutenburg.”</p>
				<p>Nicolaes hastened to obey. Gilda tried to check him with a brief. “I thank you; I would prefer to go alone!”</p>
				<p>But already he had thrown open the door, and anon his husky voice could be heard giving orders to <abbr class="eoc">Jan.</abbr></p>
				<p>Gilda, at the last, turned once more to look on her enemy. He caught her eye, bowed very low, his hand almost touching the ground ere he brought it with a sweeping flourish back to his breast, in the most approved fashion lately brought in from France.</p>
				<p>“In half an hour supper will be served,” he said. “I await the honour of the burgomaster’s company and of your own!”</p>
				<p>And he remained in an attitude of perfect deference whilst she passed silently out of the room.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
