<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XII: Tears, Sighs, Hearts</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Tears, Sighs, Hearts</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="chapter-12-1" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>Gilda caught sight of her beloved the moment she entered. To say that their eyes met would indeed be folly. Certain it is, however, that the blind man turned his sightless gaze in her direction. She only gave a gasp, pressed her hands to her heart as if the pain there was unendurable, and at the moment even the beauty of her face was marred by the look of soul-racking misery in her eyes and the quivering lines around her mouth.</p>
				<p>The next moment, even while Jan and the soldiers retired, closing the doors behind them, she was in her husband’s arms. Ay, even though Stoutenburg tried to intercept her. She did not hear his mocking laugh, or her brother’s vigorous protest, nor yet her father’s cry of horror. She just clung to him who, blind, fallen, degraded an you will, was still the beloved of her heart, the man to whom she had dedicated her soul.</p>
				<p>She swallowed her tears, too proud to allow those who had wrought his ruin to see how mortally she was hurt.</p>
				<p>She passed her delicate hands, fragrant as the petals of flowers, over his grimy face, those poor, stricken eyes, the noble brow so deeply furrowed with pain. She murmured words of endearment and of tenderness such as a mother might find to soothe the trouble of a suffering child. All in a moment. Stoutenburg had not even the time to interfere, to utter the savage oaths which rose from his vengeful heart at sight of the loving pity which this beautiful woman lavished on so contemptible an object.</p>
				<p>Nor had the blind man time to encircle that exquisite form in his trembling arms. He had put them out at first, with a pathetic gesture of infinite longing. It was just a flash, a vision of his past self, an oblivion of the hideous, appalling present. Her arms at that moment were round his neck, her head against his breast, her soft, fair hair against his lips.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-12-2" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>Then something happened. A magnetic current seemed to pass through the air. Diogenes freed himself with a sudden jerk from Gilda’s clinging arms, staggered back against the table, swaying on his feet and uttering an inane laugh; whilst she, left standing alone, turned wide, bewildered eyes on her brother Nicolaes, who happened to be close to her at the moment. I think that she was near to unconsciousness then, and that she would have fallen, but that the burgomaster stepped quickly to her side and put his arms round her.</p>
				<p>“May God punish you,” he muttered between his teeth, and turned to Stoutenburg, who had watched the whole scene with a sinister scowl, “for this wanton and unnecessary cruelty!”</p>
				<p>“You wrong me, mynheer,” Stoutenburg retorted, with a shrug “I but tried to make your daughter’s decision easier for her.”</p>
				<p>Then, as the burgomaster made no reply, but, with grim, set look on his face, drew his daughter gently down to the nearest chair, Stoutenburg went on lightly, speaking directly to Gilda:</p>
				<p>“In the course of my travels, <span xml:lang="nl">mejuffrouw</span>, I came across a wise philosopher in Italy. He was a man whom an adverse fate had robbed of most things that he held precious; but he told me that he had quite succeeded in conquering adversity by the following means. He would gaze dispassionately on the objects of his past desires, see their defects, appraise them at their just value, and in every case he found that their loss was not so irreparable as he had originally believed.”</p>
				<p>“A fine moral lesson, my lord,” the burgomaster interposed, seeing that Gilda either would not or could not speak as yet. “But I do not see its point.”</p>
				<p>“ ’Tis a simple one, mynheer,” Stoutenburg retorted coldly. “I pray you, look on the man to whom, an you had your way, you would even now link your daughter.”</p>
				<p>Instinctively Beresteyn turned his lowering gaze in the direction to which his lordship now pointed with a persuasive gesture. Diogenes was standing beside the table, his powerful frame drawn up to its full height, his sightless eyes blinking and gleaming with weird inconsequence in the flickering light of the candles. His hands were clasped behind his back, and on his face there was a curious expression which the burgomaster was not shrewd enough to define⁠—one of self-deprecation, yet withal of introspection and of detachment, as if the helpless body alone were present and the mind had gone a-roaming in the land of dreams. The burgomaster tried manfully to conceal the look of half-contemptuous pity which, much against his will, had crept into his eyes.</p>
				<p>“The man,” he rejoined calmly, “is what Fate and a dastard’s hand have made him, my lord. Many a fine work of God hath been marred by an evildoer’s action.”</p>
				<p>“That is as may be mynheer,” Stoutenburg riposted coolly. “But ’tis of the present and of the future you have to think now⁠—not of the past.”</p>
				<p>“Even so, my lord, I would sooner see my daughter in the arms of the stricken lion than in those of a wily jackal.”</p>
				<p>“Am I the wily jackal?” Stoutenburg put in, with a sneer. Then, as the burgomaster made no reply, he added tersely: “I see that the <span xml:lang="nl">jongejuffrouw</span> hath told you⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Everything,” Beresteyn assented calmly.</p>
				<p>“And that I await your blessing on our union?”</p>
				<p>“My blessing you cannot have, my lord, as you well know,” the burgomaster retorted firmly. “ ’Twas blasphemy to invoke the name of God on such an unholy alliance. My daughter is the lawfully wedded wife of an English gentleman, Sir Percy Blakeney by name, and until the law of this country doth sever those bonds she cannot wed another.”</p>
				<p>Stoutenburg gave a strident laugh.</p>
				<p>“That is, indeed, unfortunate for the English gentleman with the high-sounding name,” he said, with a sneer, “whom I gravely suspect of being naught but the common varlet whom we all know so well in Haarlem. But, gentleman or churl,” he added, with a cynical shrug, “ ’tis all one to me. He hangs tomorrow, unless⁠—”</p>
				<p>A loud cry of burning indignation escaped the burgomaster’s lips.</p>
				<p>“You would not further provoke the wrath of God,” he exclaimed, “by this foul and cowardly crime!”</p>
				<p>“And why not, I pray you?” the other coolly retorted. “Nor do I think that the Almighty would greatly care what happened to this drunken knave. The refuse of human kind, the halt, the lame, and the blind, are best out of the way.”</p>
				<p>“A man, my lord,” the burgomaster protested, “Who when he had you in his power, generously spared your life!”</p>
				<p>“The more fool he!” Stoutenburg riposted drily. “ ’Tis my turn now. He hangs tomorrow, unless, indeed⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Unless, what, my lord?”</p>
				<p>“Unless,” Stoutenburg went on, with an evil leer, “my future wife will deign to plead with me for him⁠—with a kiss.”</p>
				<p>A groan like that of a wounded beast broke from the burgomaster’s heavy heart. For a moment a light that was almost murderous gleamed in his eyes. His fists were clenched; he murmured a dark threat against the man who goaded him well-nigh to madness. Then, suddenly, he met Stoutenburg’s mocking glance fixed upon him, and a huge sob rose in his throat, almost choking him. Gilda, with a pitiful moan, had hidden her face against her father’s sleeve.</p>
				<p>“ ’Tis but anticipating the happy time by a few hours,” Stoutenburg went on, with calm cynicism. “But I have a fancy to hold my future wife in my arms now⁠—at this moment⁠—and to grant her in exchange for her first willing kiss the life of a miserable wretch whose life or death are, in truth, of no account to me.”</p>
				<p>He took a step or two forward in the direction where Gilda sat, clinging with desperate misery to her father. Then, as the burgomaster, superb with indignation, grand in his dignity, Instinctively interposed his burly figure between his daughter and the man whom she loathed, Stoutenburg added, with well-assumed carelessness:</p>
				<p>“If the <span xml:lang="nl">jongejuffrouw</span> prefers to put off the happy moment until we are alone in my camp tomorrow, we’ll say no more about it. Let the rogue hang; I care not!”</p>
				<p>“My lord,”⁠—the burgomaster spoke once more in a vigorous protest, which, alas, he knew to be futile⁠—“what you suggest is monstrous, inhuman! God will never permit⁠—”</p>
				<p>“I pray you, mynheer,” Stoutenburg broke in fiercely, “let us leave the Almighty out of our affairs. I have read my Bible as assiduously as you when I was younger, and in it I learned that God hath enjoined all wives to submit themselves to their husbands. A kiss from my betrothed, a word or gentle pleading, are little enough to ask in exchange for an act of clemency. And you, Heer Burgomaster, do but stiffen my will by your interference. Will you, at least, let the <span xml:lang="nl">jongejuffrouw</span> decide on the matter for herself, and, in her interests and your own, give to all that she does your unqualified consent!”</p>
				<p>“My consent you’ll never wring from me, as you well know, my lord. I and my daughter are powerless to withstand your might, but if we bend to the yoke it is because it hath pleased God that we should wear it, not because we submit with a free will. By exulting in such a monstrous crime you do but add to the loathing which we both feel for you⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Silence!” Stoutenburg broke in fiercely. “Silence, you dolt! What good, think you, you do yourself or your daughter by provoking me beyond endurance? She knows my decision, and so, methinks, do you. If the <span xml:lang="nl">jongejuffrouw</span> feels such unqualified hatred for me, let her return to your protecting arms and leave Amersfoort to its fate. As for that sightless varlet, let him hang, I say! I am a fool, indeed to listen to your gibberish! Jan!” he called, and strode to the door with a great show of determination, staking his all now on this card which he had decided to play.</p>
				<p>But the card was a winning one, as well he knew. Already Gilda, as if moved by an unseen voice, had jumped to her feet and intercepted him ere he reached the door. Her whole appearance had changed⁠—the expression of her eyes, her tone, her gestures.</p>
				<p>“My father is overwrought, my lord,” she said firmly. “He hath already promised me that he would offer no opposition to my wishes.”</p>
				<p>She looked him straight in the eyes, and he returned her gaze, his restless eyes seeming to search her very soul. She had, in truth, changed most markedly. She was, of course, afraid⁠—afraid for that miserable <i xml:lang="nl">plepshurk’s</i> life. But the change was something more than that⁠—at least, Stoutenburg chose to think so. There was something in her glance at this moment that he did not quite understand, that he did not dare understand. A wavering⁠—almost he would have called it a softness, had he dared. He came nearer to her, and, though at first she drew back from him, she presently held her ground, still gazing on him like a bird when it is fascinated and cannot move.</p>
				<p>Now he was quite sure that her blue eyes looked less hard, and certainly her mouth was less tightly set. Her lips were slightly parted, and her breath came quick and panting. Ah, women were queer creatures! Had Nicolaes been right when he quoted the English play? Gilda had certainly begun by falling against that contemptible rascal’s breast, but since then? Had her wayward fancy been repelled by that whole air of physical degradation which emanated from the once brilliant cavalier, or had it been merely dazzled by visions of power and of wealth, which had their embodiment in him who was her future lord?</p>
				<p>He himself could not say. All that he knew, all that he felt of a certainty now, was that he held more than one winning card in this gamble for possession of an exquisite and desirable woman. Still holding her gaze, he took her hands. She did not resist, did not attempt to draw away from him, and he murmured softly:</p>
				<p>“What are your wishes, <i xml:lang="nl">myn engel</i>?”</p>
				<p>“To submit to your will, my lord,” she replied firmly.</p>
				<p>“At last!” he exclaimed, on a note of triumph, drew her still closer to him. “A kiss, fair one, to clinch this bargain, which hath made me the happiest of men!”</p>
				<p>He had lost his head for the moment. Satisfaction, and an almost feverish sense of exultation, had turned his blood to liquid fire. All that he saw was this lovely woman, whom he had nearly conquered. Nearly, but not quite. At his desire for a kiss he felt that she stiffened. She closed her eyes, and even her lips became bloodless. She appeared on the verge of a swoon. Bah! Even this phase would pass away. Nicolaes was right. Women reserved their contempt for weaklings. In the end ’twas the master whom they adored.</p>
				<p>“A kiss, fair one!” he called again. “And the rogue shall live or hang according as your lips are sweet or bitter!”</p>
				<p>He was on the point of snatching that kiss at last, when suddenly there came so violent a crash that the whole room shook with the concussion, and even the windows rattled in their frames. The blind man, more unsteady than ever on his feet, had tried to get hold of a chair, lost his balance in the act, and, in the endeavour to save himself from falling, had lurched so clumsily against the table that it overturned, and all the objects upon it⁠—silver, crystal, china dishes, and candelabra⁠—fell with a deafening clatter on the floor.</p>
				<p>Stoutenburg, uttering one of his favourite oaths, had instinctively turned to see whence had come this terrific noise. In turning, his hold on Gilda’s wrists had slightly relaxed; sufficiently, at any rate, to enable her to free herself from his grasp and to seek shelter once more beside her father. Diogenes alone had remained unruffled through the commotion. Indeed, he appeared wholly unconscious that he had brought it about. He had collapsed amidst the litter, and now sprawled on the floor, surrounded by a medley of broken glass, guttering candles, hot food and liquor, convulsed with laughter, whist his huge, dark eyes, with the dilated pupils and pale, narrow circles of blue light, looked strangely ghostlike in the gloom.</p>
				<p>“Who in thunder,” he muttered inarticulately, “is making this confounded din?”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-12-3" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>At the noise, too, the men had come running in from the hall. The sound had been akin to the detonation of a dozen pistols, and they had rushed along, prepared for a fight. With the fall of the candelabra, the vast banqueting hall had suddenly been plunged into semidarkness. Only a couple of wax candles in tall sconces, which had originally set on the sideboard, vaguely illumined the disorderly scene.</p>
				<p>Diogenes, with his infectious laugh, did in truth succeed in warding off the punishment which his Magnificence already held in preparation for him. As it was, Stoutenburg caught sight of Gilda’s look of anxiety, and this at once put him into a rare good humour. He had had his wish. Gilda had been almost kind, had practically yielded to him in the presence of the man whom he desired to humiliate and to wound, as he himself had been humiliated and wounded in the past.</p>
				<p>Whether the blind man’s keen sense of hearing had taken in every detail of the scene, it was of course impossible to say. But one thing he must have heard⁠—the brief soliloquy at the door, when Gilda, in response to his ardent query. “What are your wishes, <i xml:lang="nl">myn engel</i>?” had replied quite firmly: “To submit to your will, my lord!” That moment must, in truth, have been more galling and more bitter to the once gallant Laughing Cavalier than the rattle of the rope upon the gallows, or the first consciousness that he was irremediably blind.</p>
				<p>Indeed, Stoutenburg had had something more than his wish. To make a martyr of the rogue, he would have told you, was not part of his desire. All that he wanted was to obliterated the man’s former brilliant personality from Gilda’s mind; that he should henceforth dwell in her memory as she last saw him, abject in his obvious impotence, owing his life to the woman whom he had wooed and conquered in the past with the high hand of a reckless adventurer. After that, the rogue might hang or perish in a ditch: his lordship did not care. What happened to blind men in these days of fighting when none but the best men had a chance to live at all, he had never troubled his head to inquire. At any rate, he knew that a sightless lion was less harmful than a keen-eyed mouse. Ah, in truth he had had more than his wish and satisfied now as to the present and the future, the thought that the moment had come to let well alone, and to remove from Gilda’s sight the spectacle which, by some subtle reaction, might turn her heart back to pity for the knave. He gave Jan a significant nod.</p>
				<p>But Gilda, whose glowing eyes had watched his every movement, was quick to interpose.</p>
				<p>“My lord,” she cried in protest, “I hold you to your bargain!”</p>
				<p>“Have no fear, myn chat,” he answered suavely. “I will not repudiate it. The fellow’s life is safe enough whilst you and the Heer Burgomaster honour me by supping with me. After that, the decision rests with you. As I said just now, he shall live or hang according as your lips are sweet or bitter. For the nonce, I am wearied and hungry. We’ll sup first, so please you.”</p>
				<p>And Gilda had to stand by whilst she saw her husband dragged away from her presence. He offered no resistance; indeed, accepted the situation with that good-humoured philosophy which was so characteristic of him. But, oh, if she could have conveyed to him by a look all the tenderness, the sorrow, the despair, that was torturing her heart! If she could have run to him just once more, to whisper into his ear those burning words of love which would have eased his pain and hers!</p>
				<p>If she could have defied that abominable tyrant who gloated over her misery, and, hand in hand with her beloved, have met death by his side, with his arms around her, her spirit wedded to his, ere they appeared together before the judgement seat of God!</p>
				<p>But, as that arrogant despot had reminded her, she had even lost the freedom to die. The destinies of her native city were in her hands. Unless she bowed her willing neck to his will, Amersfoort and all its citizens would be wiped off the face of the earth. And as she watched the chosen of her heart led like a captive lion to humiliation if not to death those monstrous words rang in her ears, that surely must provoke the wrath of God.</p>
				<p>Therefore, she watched his departure dry-eyed and motionless. Ay! envying him in her heart, that he, at least, was not called upon to make such an appalling sacrifice as lay now before her. She had indeed come to that sublimity of human suffering that she almost wished to see those dear, sightless eyes closed in their last long sleep, rather than that he should be forced to endure what to him would be ten thousand times worse than death⁠—her submission to that miscreant⁠—her willing union; and he, ignorant of how the tyrant had wrung this submission from her.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
