<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VIII: Devil’s-Writ</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Devil’s-Writ</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="chapter-8-1" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>When Diogenes, taken wholly unawares by Nicolaes’ treacherous blow, had momentarily lost his balance, he would have been in a precarious position indeed had not his faithful friends been close at hand at the moment.</p>
				<p>It is difficult to surmise how terribly anxious the two philosophers had been these past few days. Indeed, their anxiety had proved more than a counterpart to that felt by Gilda, and had, with its simple-hearted sympathy, expressed in language more whimsical than choice, been intensely comforting to her.</p>
				<p>Both these worthies had been inured to blows and hurts from the time when as mere lads, they first learned to handle a sword, and Pythagoras’ wound, which would have laid an ordinary man low for a fortnight, was, after four days, already on the mend. To keep a man of that type in bed, or even within four walls, when he began to feel better was more than anyone could do. And when he understood that Diogenes had been absent four days on an errand for the Stadtholder, that the <span xml:lang="nl">jongejuffrouw</span> was devoured with anxiety on his behalf, and that that spindle-legged gossoon Socrates was spending most of the day and one half of the night on horseback, patrolling the ramparts watching for the comrade’s return; when he understood all that, I say, it was not likely that he⁠—Pythagoras⁠—an able-bodied man and a doughty horseman at that, would be content to lie abed and be physicked by any grovelling leech.</p>
				<p>Thus the pair of them were providentially on the watch on that memorable March 21, and they both saw their comrade-in-arms enter the city by the Joris Poort. They followed him as best they could through the crowd, cursing and pushing their way, knowing well that Diogenes’ objective could be none other than a certain house they wot of on the quay, where a lovely <span xml:lang="nl">jongejuffrouw</span> was waiting in tears for her beloved.</p>
				<p>Remember that to these two caitiffs the fact that the Spaniards were said to be at the very gates of Amersfoort was but a mere incident. With their comrade within the city, they feared nothing, were prepared for anything. They had been in far worse plights than this many a time in their career, the three of them, and had been none the worse for it in the end.</p>
				<p>Of course, now matters had become more complicated through the <span xml:lang="nl">jongejuffrouw</span>. She had become the first consideration, and though it was impossible not to swear at Diogenes for thus having laid this burden on them all, it was equally impossible to shirk its responsibilities.</p>
				<p>The <span xml:lang="nl">jongejuffrouw</span> above all. That had become the moral code of these two philosophers, and with those confounded Spaniards likely to descend on this town⁠—why, the <span xml:lang="nl">jongejuffrouw</span> must be got out of it as soon as may be! No wonder that Diogenes had turned up just in the nick of time! Something evidently was in the wind, and it behooved for comrades-in-arms to be there, ready to help as occasion arose.</p>
				<p>A simple code enough, you’ll admit; worthy of simple, unsophisticated hearts. Socrates, being the more able-bodied of the two, then took command, dismounted, and left his lubberly compeer in charge of the horses at a comparatively secluded corner of the marketplace.</p>
				<p>“If you can get hold of one more horse,” he said airily, “one that is well-saddled and looks sprightly and fresh, do not let your super-sensitive honesty stand in your way. Diogenes’ mount looked absolutely spent, and I’m sure he’ll need another.”</p>
				<p>With which parting admonition he turned on his heel and made his way toward the quay.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-8-2" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>Thus it was that Socrates happened to be on the spot, or very near it, when Diogenes was struck by the hand of a traitor, and, wearied, sick, and faint, lost his footing and fell for a moment helpless against the steps, whilst Nicolaes Beresteyn dug his spurs into his horse’s sides and urged the Stadtholder to immediate haste.</p>
				<p>A second or two later these two were lost to sight in the crowd. It was Socrates who received his half-swooning friend in his arms, and who dragged him incontinently into the recess formed by the side of the stone steps and the wall of the burgomaster’s house.</p>
				<p>By great good fortune, the dagger-thrust aimed by the abominable miscreant had lost most of its virulence in the thick folds of Diogenes’ cloak. The result was just a flesh wound in the neck, nothing that would cause so hardened a soldier more than slight discomfort. His scarf, tied tightly around his shoulders by Socrates’ rough, but experienced hands, was all that was needed for the moment. It had only been fatigue, and perhaps the unexpectedness of the onslaught, that had brought him to his knees for that brief second, and rendered him momentarily helpless. Time enough, by mischance for Nicolaes to drag the Stadtholder finally out of sight.</p>
				<p>But by the time Diogenes’ faithful comrade had found shelter for him in the angle of the wall the feeling of sickness had passed away.</p>
				<p>“The Stadtholder,” he queried abruptly, “where is he?”</p>
				<p>“Gone!” Socrates grunted through clenched teeth. “Gone, together with that spawn of the devil who⁠—”</p>
				<p>“After him!” Diogenes commanded, speaking once more with that perfect quietude which is the attribute of men of action at moments of acute peril. “Get me a horse, man! Mine is spent.”</p>
				<p>“In the marketplace,” Socrates responded laconically. “Pythagoras is in charge. You can have the beast, and we’ll follow.” Then he added, under his breath: “And the <span xml:lang="nl">jongejuffrouw</span>? She was so anxious⁠—”</p>
				<p>Diogenes made no reply, gave one look up at the house which contained all that for him was dearest on God’s earth. But he did not sigh. I think the longing and the disappointment were too keen even for that. The next moment he had already started to push his way through the throng along the quay, and thence into Vriese Straat in the direction of the marketplace, closely followed by his long-legged familiar.</p>
				<p>As soon as the Groote Market lay open before him, his sharp eyes searched the crowd for a sight of the Stadtholder’s plumed bonnet. Soon he spied his Highness right across the place, with Nicolaes riding close to his stirrup.</p>
				<p>The two horsemen were then tending toward Joris Laan, which leads straight to the <i xml:lang="nl">poort</i>.</p>
				<p>At that end of the <i xml:lang="nl">markt</i> the crowd was much less dense, and Joris Laan beyond appeared practically deserted. It was, you must remember, from that side that the enemy would descend upon the city when he came, and the moving throng, if viewed from a height, would now have looked like a column of smoke when it is all blown one way by the wind. Already the Stadtholder and Nicolaes had been free to put their horses to a trot. Another moment and they would be galloping down Joris Laan, which is but three hundred yards from the <i xml:lang="nl">poort</i>.</p>
				<p>“Oh, God, grant me wings!” Diogenes muttered, between his teeth.</p>
				<p>“What are you going to do?” Socrates asked.</p>
				<p>“Prevent the Stadtholder from falling into an abominable trap, if I can,” the other replied briefly.</p>
				<p>Socrates pointed to the distant corner of the <i xml:lang="nl">markt</i>, where Pythagoras could be dimly perceived waiting patiently beside three horses.</p>
				<p>“I see the ruffian has stolen a horse,” he said. “So long as it is a fresh one⁠—”</p>
				<p>“I shall need it.” Diogenes remarked simply.</p>
				<p>“I told him only to get the best, but you can’t trust that loon since good fortune hath made him honest.”</p>
				<p>The next few seconds brought them to the spot. Pythagoras hailed them with delight. He was getting tired of waiting. Three horses, obviously fresh and furnished with excellent saddlery, were here ready. Even Socrates had a word of praise for his fat compeer’s choice.</p>
				<p>“Where did you get him from?” he queried, indicating the mount which Diogenes had without demur selected for himself.</p>
				<p>Pythagoras shrugged his shoulder. What did it matter who had been made the poorer by a good horse? Enough that it was here now, ready to do service to the finest horseman in the Netherlands. Already Diogenes had swung himself into the saddle, and now he turned his horse toward Nieuwpoort.</p>
				<p>“Where do we go?” the others cried.</p>
				<p>“After me!” he shouted in reply.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-8-3" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>Nose to heels, the three riders thundered through the city. It was deserted at this end of it, remember. Thank God for that! And now for a host of guardian angels to the rescue! Down the Oude Straat they galloped, their horses’ hoofs raising myriads of sparks from the uneven cobblestones. “God grant me wings!” the leader had cried ere he set spurs to his horse, and the others followed without an instant’s thought as to the whither or the wherefore. “After me!” he had called; and they who had fought beside him so often, who had bled with him, suffered with him, triumphed at times, been merry always, were well content to follow him now and forget everything in the exhilaration of this chase.</p>
				<p>A chase it was! They could not doubt it, even though they seemed at this moment to be speeding in the opposite direction to that pursued by the Stadtholder and Nicolaes Beresteyn. But they well knew their friend’s way, when he let his mount have free rein and threw up his head with that air of intense vitality which in him was at its height when life and death were having a tussle somewhere at the end of a ride.</p>
				<p>Down the Oude Straat, which presently abuts on the ramparts. Then another two hundred yards to Nieuwpoort. No one in sight now. This part of the city looks like one of the dead. Doors open wide, litter of every sort encumbering the road. The din from afar, even the ceaseless tolling of <abbr>St.</abbr> Maria bell, seem like dream-sounds, ghostlike and unreal. Now the <i xml:lang="nl">poort</i>. Still no one insight. No guard. No sentry. The gate left open. Here two or three halberds hastily thrown down in some hurried flight. There a culverin, forlorn looking, gaping wide-mouthed, like some huge toad yawning, as if astonished or wearied to find itself deserted. Then again, a pile of muskets. It must have been a sudden panic that drove the guard from their post. But, thank God, the gate!</p>
				<p>Diogenes is already through; after him his two compeers. A quarter of a league further on they suddenly draw rein. The horses rear, snorting and tossing, panting with the excitement and fretted with the curb. The riders blink for a second or two in the glare. The white mist is positively blinding here, where its sovereignty is unfettered. Just a clump of trees, way out on the right, here and there a hut with thatched roof and a piece of low fencing, or the gaunt arms of a windmill stretched with eerie stillness to the silvery sky. And above it all the mist⁠—a pale shroud that envelopes everything.</p>
				<p>To the east and the south the arid upland plunges headlong through it into infinity, cloaks within its stern bosom the secrets of the lurking enemy⁠—the armies of De Berg, the Spanish outposts, the ambuscades. To the west Utrecht, unseen⁠—and just now two tiny specks speeding along its road⁠—the Stadtholder and Nicolaes Beresteyn. They came out into the open through Joris Poort, and are now some four hundred yards or less from the spot where three panting but exhilarated philosophers were now filling their lungs with the crisp, humid air.</p>
				<p>They looked neither to right nor left. The Stadtholder, easily recognizable by his plumed bonnet, rides a length or less in advance of his companion. The fog has not yet swallowed them up. Diogenes takes all this in. A simple enough picture⁠—the sea-fog and two riders speeding towards Utrecht. But a swift intaking of his breath, a tight closing of his firm lips, indicate to the others that all is not as simple as it seems.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-8-4" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>Then a very curious thing happened. At first it seemed nothing. But to the watchers outside Nieuwpoort it had the same effect as a flash of lightning would have in an apparently cloudless sky. It began with Nicolaes Beresteyn drawing his horse close up to the Stadtholder, on his Highness’s right. Then for another few seconds the two riders went along side by side, like one black speck now, still quite distinguishable through the fog. Socrates and Pythagoras had their eyes on Diogenes. But Diogenes did not move. He was frowning, and his face had a set and tense expression. He had his horse tightly on the curb, and appeared almost wilfully to fret the animal, who was pawing the wet, sandy ground and covering itself with lather⁠—a picture of tearing impatience.</p>
				<p>“What do we do now?” Pythagoras exclaimed at last, unable, just like the horse, to contain his excitement.</p>
				<p>“Wait,” Diogenes replied curtly. “All may be well after all.”</p>
				<p>“In which case?” queried Socrates.</p>
				<p>“Nothing!”</p>
				<p>A groan of disappointment rose to a couple of parched throats; but it was never uttered. What went on in the mist on the road to Utrecht, four hundred yards away, had stifled it at birth.</p>
				<p>The Stadtholder’s horse had become restive. A simple matter enough; but in this case unexplainable, because Maurice of Nassau was a splendid horseman. He could easily have quietened the animal if there had not been something abnormal in its sudden antics. It reared and tossed for no apparent reason, would have thrown a less experienced rider.</p>
				<p>“The brute is being teased with a goad,” Pythagoras remarked sententiously.</p>
				<p>That was clear enough. Even in the distance, and experienced eye could have perceived that the horse became more and more unmanageable every moment, and the Stadtholder’s seat more and more precarious. Then suddenly there came the sharp report of a pistol. The horse, goaded to madness, took the bit between its teeth, and with a final plunge bolted across country, away from that strident noise, which, twice repeated at intervals, had turned its fretfulness into blind panic.</p>
				<p>It was at the first report that Socrates and Pythagoras again glanced at their leader. A gurgle of delight escaped them when they caught his eye. They had received their orders. The next moment all three had dug their spurs in their horses’ flanks and were galloping over sand and ditch.</p>
				<p>Diogenes’ horse, given free rein at last, after the maddening curb of awhile ago, was soon half a dozen lengths ahead of the others, tearing along with all its might at right angles to the direction in which the Stadtholder’s panic-stricken animal was rushing like one possessed. That direction was Ede.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-8-5" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>In truth, the low-lying land veiled in sea-fog must at that moment have presented a very curious spectacle. Maurice of Nassau, Prince of Orange, the hope and pride of the Netherlands, helpless upon a horse that was running away with him straight in the direction of the nearest Spanish outposts.</p>
				<p>Three soldiers of fortune, strangers, in the land hastening to intercept him, and a couple of hundred yards or so behind the Stadtholder, Nicolaes Beresteyn, puzzled and terror-filled at this unexpected check to his manoeuvre, pushing along for dear life.</p>
				<p>It had been such a splendid scheme, evolved over there in the lonely mill on the Veluwe, between a reprobate and a traitor. The Spaniards on the watch. The Stadtholder helpless, whilst his mount carried him headlong into their hands. What a triumph for Stoutenburg, who had planned it all, and for Nicolaes Beresteyn, the worker of the infamous plot! The Stadtholder prisoner in the hands of the Archduchess! His life the price of the subjection of the Netherlands!</p>
				<p>And all to be frustrated by a foolish mischance! Three riders intent upon intercepting that runaway horse! Who in thunder were they? The mist, remember, would have blurred Nicolaes’ vision. His thoughts were not just then on the man whom he hated. They were fixed upon the possibility⁠—remote, alas!⁠—of convincing the Stadtholder after this that the goaded horse had been the victim of a series of accidents.</p>
				<p>Even at this moment the foremost of the three riders had overtaken the runaway. He galloped for a length or two beside it, then, with a dexterous and unerring grip, he seized the panic-stricken animal by the bridle. A few seconds of desperate struggle ’twixt man and beast. Then man remained the conqueror. The horse, panting, quivering in every limb, covered in sweat and foam, was finally brought to a standstill, and the Stadtholder in an instant had his feet clear of the stirrups and swung himself out of the saddle.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-8-6" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>Then, and then only, did Nicolaes Beresteyn recognize the man who for the second time had frustrated his nefarious plans⁠—the man whom, because of his easy triumphs, the humiliation which he had inflicted upon him, because of his careless gaiety and his very joy of life, he hated with a curious, sinister intensity.</p>
				<p>A ferocious imprecation rose to his lips. For awhile everything became a blank. The present, the future, even the past. Everything became chaos in his mind, he could no longer think. All that he had planned became a blur, as if the sea-fog had enveloped his senses as well as the entire landscape.</p>
				<p>But this confused mental state only lasted a very little while⁠—a few seconds perhaps. Slowly, while he gazed on that distant group of men and horses, his perceptions became clearer once more. And even before the imprecation had died on his lips it gave place to a smile of triumph. Nicolaes Beresteyn had remembered that his Majesty the devil might well be trusted to care for his own. Had he not served the hell-born liege lord well?</p>
				<p>For the nonce he brought his horse to a halt. It would be worse than folly to go on. With recognition of those three horsemen over there had also come the certainty that he was now irretrievably unmasked. The Stadtholder, his father, his sister, even his young wife, would turn from him in horror, as from a traitor and an outcast⁠—a pariah, marked with the brand of Cain.</p>
				<p>No! Henceforth, for good or for evil, his fortunes must be linked openly with Stoutenburg⁠—with the man who wielded such a strange cabalistic power over him that he (Nicolaes)⁠—rich, newly wed, in a highly enviable worldly position⁠—had been ready to sacrifice his all in his cause, and to throw in the last shred of his honour into the bargain. In Stoutenburg’s cause⁠—ay, and in order to be revenged on the man who had never wronged him save in his conceit⁠—that most vulnerable spot in the moral armour of such contemptible rogues as was Nicolaes Beresteyn.</p>
				<p>The spot where he had brought his horse to a halt was immediately behind a low, deserted hut, which concealed him from view. Here he dismounted and, throwing the reins over his arm, advanced cautiously to a point of vantage at the angle of the little building, whence he could see what those four men were doing over there but himself remain unseen.</p>
				<p>They, too, had dismounted, and were obviously intent on examining the Stadtholder’s horse. A sinister scowl spread over Nicolaes Beresteyn’s face. There was still a chance, then, of putting a bullet in one or other of those two men⁠—the hated enemy or the Stadtholder. Nicolaes pondered; the scowl on his face became almost satanic in its expression of cruelty. Awhile ago, he had replaced his pistol in the holster, after it had served its nefarious purpose. Now he took it out again and examined it thoroughly.</p>
				<p>It had one more charge in it, the devilish charge invented by the Borgias, the secret of which one of that infamous race had confided to Stoutenburg. The fumes from the powder when it struck the eyes must cause irretrievable blindness. Indeed, it had proved its worth already.</p>
				<p>Nicolaes, from his hiding-place, could see those four men quite clearly. The Stadtholder, Diogenes, the two caitiffs, all standing round the one horse. Then Diogenes took something out of his belt. He raised his arm, and the next moment a sharp report rang through the mistladen air. The poor animal rolled over instantly into the mud.</p>
				<p>The scowl on Nicolaes’ face now gave place once more to a smile of triumph⁠—more sinister than the frown. With the gesture of a conqueror, he clutched the pistol more firmly. The potent fumes had, in truth, wrought their fiendish work on the innocent beast. Diogenes had just put it out of its misery, and his two familiars were preparing to mount one of the horses, whilst he and the Stadtholder had the other two by the reins.</p>
				<p>Why not?</p>
				<p>The miscreant was sure enough of his aim, and the others would be unprepared. He was sure, too, of the swiftness of his horse, and the Spanish outposts were less than a quarter of a league away, whilst within half that distance Stoutenburg was on the watch with a vedette, waiting to capture the Stadtholder on his runaway horse as it had been prearranged.</p>
				<p>Once there he⁠—Nicolaes⁠—would be amongst friends.</p>
				<p>Then, why not?</p>
				<p>Already the riders had put their horses to a trot. Diogenes and the Stadtholder on ahead, the two loons some few lengths in their rear. In less than three minutes they would be within range of Nicolaes’ pistol and its blinding fumes. And Diogenes was riding on the side nearest to his enemy.</p>
				<p>Nicolaes Beresteyn grasped his weapon more firmly. He realized with infinite satisfaction that his arm was perfectly steady. Indeed, he had never felt so absolutely calm. The measured tramp of the horses keyed him up to a point of unswerving determination. He raised his arm. The horses were galloping now. They would pass like a flash within twenty paces of him.</p>
				<p>The next moment the sharp report of the pistol rang stridently through the mist. There was a burst, a flash, a column of smoke. Nicolaes jumped into the saddle and set spurs to his horse. The other riders went galloping on for a few seconds⁠—not more. Then one of them swayed in his saddle. Nicolaes then was a couple of hundred yards away.</p>
				<p>“You are hit, man!” the Stadtholder exclaimed. “That abominable assassin⁠—”</p>
				<p>But the words died in his throat. The reins had slipped out of Diogenes’ grasp, and he rolled down into the mud.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-8-7" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>A sudden jerk brought the Stadtholder’s horse to a halt. He swung himself out of the saddle, ran quickly to his companion.</p>
				<p>“You are hit, man!” he reiterated; this time with an unexplainable feeling of dread.</p>
				<p>The other seemed so still, and yet his clothes and the soft earth around him showed no stains of blood.</p>
				<p>Pythagoras now was also on the spot. He had slid off the horse as soon as the infamous assassin had started to ride away. Socrates was trying to give chase. Even now two pistol-shots rang out in quick succession right across the moorland. But the hellhound was well mounted, and the avenging bullets failed to reach their mark. All this the Stadtholder took in with a rapid glance, even whilst Pythagoras, round-eyed and scared, was striving with gentle means to raise the strangely inert figure.</p>
				<p>“He hath swooned,” the Stadtholder suggested.</p>
				<p>The stricken man had one arm across his face. His had had fallen from his head, leaving the fine, square brow free and the crisp hair weighted by the sweat of some secret agony. The mouth, too, was visible, and the chin, with its four days’ growth of beard, the mouth that was always ready with a smile. It was set now in an awesome contraction of pain, and, withal, that terrible immobility.</p>
				<p>Now Socrates was arriving. A moment or two later he, too, had dismounted, cursing lustily that he had failed to hit the hellhound. A mute query, an equally mute reply, was all that passed between him and Pythagoras.</p>
				<p>Then the stricken man stirred as if suddenly roused to consciousness.</p>
				<p>“Are you hit, man?” the Stadtholder queried again.</p>
				<p>“No⁠—no!” he replied quickly. “Only a little dazed. That is all.”</p>
				<p>He raised himself to a sitting posture, helping himself up with his hands, which sank squelching into the mud; whereat he gave a short laugh, which somehow went a cold shiver down the listener’s spines.</p>
				<p>“Where is my hat?” he asked. “Pythagoras, you lazy loon, get me my hat.”</p>
				<p>He must indeed have been still dazed, for when his friend picked up the hat and gave it to him, his hand shot out for it quite wide of the mark. He gave another laugh, short and toneless as before, and set the hat on his head, pulling down well over his eyes.</p>
				<p>“I had a mugful of hot ale at Amersfoort before starting,” he said. “It must have got into my head.”</p>
				<p>He made no attempt to get to his feet, but just sat there, with his two slender hands all covered with mud, tightly clasped between his knees.</p>
				<p>“Can you get to horse?” his Highness queried at last.</p>
				<p>“No,” Diogenes replied, “not just yet, an’ it please you, I verily think that I would roll out of my saddle again, which would, in truth, be a disgusting spectacle.”</p>
				<p>“But we cannot leave you here, man,” the Stadtholder rejoined, with a slight tone of impatience.</p>
				<p>“And why not, I pray you?” he retorted. “Your Highness must get to Utrecht as quickly as may be. A half-drunken lout like me would only be a hindrance.”</p>
				<p>His voice was thick now and halting, in very truth like that of a man who had been drinking heavily. He rested his elbows on his knees and held his chin between his mud-stained hands.</p>
				<p>“Socrates, you lumpish vagabond,” he exclaimed all of a sudden, “don’t stand gaping at me like that! Bring forth his Highness’s horse at once, and see that you accompany him to Utrecht without further mishap, or ’tis with us you’ll have to deal on your return!”</p>
				<p>“But you, man!” the Stadtholder exclaimed once more.</p>
				<p>He felt helpless and strangely disturbed in his mind, not understanding what all this meant; why this man, usually so alert, so keen, so full of vigour, appeared for the moment akin to a babbling imbecile.</p>
				<p>“I’ll have a good sleep inside that hut, so please you,” the other replied more glibly. “These two ruffians will find me here after they have seen your gracious Highness safely inside your camp.”</p>
				<p>Then, as the Stadtholder still appeared to hesitate, and neither of the others seemed to move, Diogenes added, with an almost desperate note of entreaty:</p>
				<p>“To horse, your Highness, I beg! Every second is precious. Heaven knows what further devilry lies in wait for you, if you linger here.”</p>
				<p>“Or for you, man,” the Stadtholder murmured involuntarily.</p>
				<p>“Nay, not for me!” the other retorted quickly. “The Archduchess and her gang of vultures fly after higher game than a drunken wayfarer lost on the flats. To horse, I entreat!”</p>
				<p>And once more he pressed his hands together, and so tightly that the knuckles shone like polished ivory, even through their covering of mud.</p>
				<p>The Stadtholder then gave a sign to the two men. It was obviously futile to continue arguing here with a man who refused to move. He himself had very rightly said that every second was precious. And every second, too, was fraught with danger. Already his Highness had well-nigh been the victim of a diabolical ambuscade, might even at this hour have been a prisoner in the hands of the enemy, a hostage of incalculable value, even if his life had been spared, but for the audacious and timely interference of this man, who now appeared almost like one partially bereft of reason.</p>
				<p>“We’ll see you safely inside the hut, at any rate,” was his Highness’s last word.</p>
				<p>“And I’ll not move,” Diogenes retorted with a kind of savage obstinacy, “until the mist has swallowed up your gracious Highness on the road to Utrecht.”</p>
				<p>After that there was nothing more to be said. And we may take it that the Stadtholder got to horse with unaccountable reluctance. Something in that solitary figure sitting there, with the plumed hat tilted over his eyes and the slender, mud-stained hands tightly locked together, gave him a strange feeling of nameless dismay, like a premonition of some obscure catastrophic tragedy.</p>
				<p>But his time and his safety did not belong to himself alone. They were the inalienable property of a threatened country, that would be grasping in her death-throes if she were deprived of him at this hour of renewed and deadly danger. So he gathered the reins in his hands and set spurs to his horse, and once he had started he did not look behind him, lest his emotion got the better of his judgement.</p>
				<p>The two gossoons immediately followed in his wake. This they did because the friend they had always been wont to obey had thus commanded, and his seeming helplessness rendered his orders doubly imperative at this hour. They rode a length or two behind the Stadtholder, who presently put his horse to a gallop. Utrecht now was only a couple of leagues away.</p>
				<p>The three horsemen galloped on for a quarter of a league or less at the same even, rapid pace. Then Pythagoras slackened speed. The others did not even turn to look at him, he seemed to have done it by tacit unspoken consent. The Stadtholder and Socrates sped on in the direction of Utrecht and Pythagoras turned his horse’s head round toward the direction whence he had come.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-8-8" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p>The afternoon lay heavy and silent upon the plain. There was as yet no sign of the approach of the enemy from the south, and the low-lying land appeared momentarily hushed under its veil of mist, as if conscious of the guilty secret enshrined within its bosom. The fog, indeed, had thickened perceptibly. It lay like a wall around that lonely figure, still sitting there on the soft earth, with its head buried in its hands.</p>
				<p>Far away, the gaunt-looking carcase of the dead horse appeared as the only witness of a hideous deed as yet unrecorded. Each a blurred and uncertain mass⁠—the dead horse and the lonely figure, equally motionless, equally pathetic⁠—were now the sole occupants of the vast and silent immensity.</p>
				<p>Not far away, in the little town of Amersfoort, humanity, panic-stricken and terrorized, filled the air with clamour and with wails. Here, beneath the ghostly shroud of humid atmosphere, everything was stilled as if in ghoulish expectancy of something mysterious, indiscernible which was still to come. It was like the arrested breath before the tearing cry, the hush which precedes a storm.</p>
				<p>Overhead, a flight of rooks sent their melancholy cawing through the air.</p>
				<p>When Pythagoras was within fifty yards of his friend he dismounted, and, leading his horse by the bridle, he walked toward him. When he was quite near Diogenes put out a hand to him.</p>
				<p>“I knew you would come back, you fat-witted nonny,” he said simply.</p>
				<p>“Socrates had to go on with the Stadtholder,” the other remarked, “or he’d be here, too.” Then he added tentatively: “Will you lean on my arm?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, I’ll have to do that now, old crony, shall I not?” Diogenes replied. “That devil,” he murmured under his breath, “has blinded me!”</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
