<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIV: Treachery</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Treachery</p>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="chapter-14-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>Throughout this harrowing scene the blind man had stood by, pinioned, helpless, almost lifeless in his immobility. The only sign of life in him seemed to be in those weird, sightless orbs, in which the flickering light of the resin torches appeared to draw shafts of an unearthly glow. He was pinioned and could not move. Half a dozen soldiers had closed in around him. Whether he heard all that went on, many who were there at the time declared it to be doubtful. But, even if he heard, what could he have done? He could not even put his hands up to his ears to shut out that awful sound of his beloved wife’s hoarse, spent voice pleading desperately for him.</p>
				<p>One of the men who was on guard over him told De Voocht afterwards that he could hear the tough sinews cracking against the bonds that held the giant captive, and that great drops of sweat appeared upon the fine, wide brow. When Gilda, leaning heavily upon her father’s arm, finally mounted the stairs which led up to her room, the blind man turned his head in that direction. But the <span xml:lang="nl">jongejuffrouw</span> went on with head bent and did not glance down in response.</p>
				<p>All this we know from De Voocht, who speaks of it in his “Brieven.” But he was not himself present on the scene and hath it only from hearsay. He questioned several of the men subsequently as he came in contact with them, and, of course, the burgomaster’s testimony was the most clear and the most detailed. Mynheer Beresteyn admitted that, throughout that awful, ne’er-to-be-forgotten evening, he could not understand the blind man’s attitude, was literally tortured with doubts of him. Was he, in truth, the craven wretch which he appeared to be⁠—the miserable traitor who had sold the Stadtholder’s original plans to De Berg, betrayed Marquet and De Keysere, and hopelessly jeopardized the whole of Gelderland, if not the entire future of the Netherlands? If so, he was well-deserving of the gallows, which would not fail to be his lot.</p>
				<p>But was he? Was he?</p>
				<p>The face, of course, out of which the light of the eyes had vanished, was inscrutable. The mouth, remember, was partially hidden by the three days’ growth of beard, and grime and fatigue had further obliterated all other marks of expression. Of course, the man must have suffered tortures of humiliation and rage, which would effectually deaden all physical pain. But at the time he seemed not to suffer. Indeed, at one moment it almost seemed if he were asleep, with sightless eyes wide open, and standing on his feet.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-14-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>After Gilda and her father had disappeared on the floor above, the Lord of Stoutenburg, like a wild and caged beast awaiting satisfaction, began pacing up and down the long banqueting-hall. The doors leading into it from the hall had been left wide open, and the men could see his lordship in his restless wanderings, his heavy boots ringing against the reed-covered floor. He held his arms folded across his chest, and was gnawing⁠—yes, gnawing⁠—his knuckles in the excess of his excitement and his choler.</p>
				<p>Then he called Jan, and parleyed with him for awhile, consulted Mynheer Nicolaes, who was more taciturn and gloomy than ever before.</p>
				<p>The soldiers knew what was coming. They had witnessed the scene between the <span xml:lang="nl">jongejuffrouw</span> and his Magnificence and some of them who had wives and sweethearts of their own, had felt uncomfortable lumps, at the time, in their throats. Others, who had sons, fell to wishing that their offsprings might be as finely built, as powerful as that poor, blind, intoxicated wretch who, in truth, now had no use for his magnificent muscles.</p>
				<p>But what would you? These were troublous times. Life was cheap⁠—counted for nothing in sight of such great gentlemen as was the Lord of Stoutenburg. The varlet, it seems, had offended his lordship awhile ago. Jan knew the story, and was very bitter about it, too. Well, no man could expected to be treated with gentleness by a great lord whom he had been fool enough to offend. The blind rascallion would hang, of that there could be no doubt. The <span xml:lang="nl">jongejuffrouw</span> had been pacified with soft words and vague promises, but the rascal would hang. Any man there would have bet his shirt on the issue. You had only to look at his lordship. A more determined, more terrifying look it were impossible to meet. Even Jan looked a little scared. When his Magnificence looked like that it boded no good to anyone. All the rancour, the gall, that had accumulated in his heart against everything that pertained to the United Provinces and to their Stadtholder would effectively smother the slightest stirring of conscience or pity. Perhaps, when the <span xml:lang="nl">jongejuffrouw</span> knelt at his feet, he had thought of his mother, who, equally distraught and equally humiliated, had knelt in vain at the Stadtholder’s feet, pleading for the life of her sons. Oh, yes, all that had made the Lord of Stoutenburg terribly hard and callous.</p>
				<p>But the men were sorry for the blind vagabond, for all that. He had had nothing to do with the feuds between the Stadtholder and the sons of Olden Barneveldt. He had done nothing, seemingly, save to win the love of the beautiful lady whom his Magnificence had marked for his own. He was brave, too. You could not help admiring him as he stood between you and your comrades, his head thrown back, a splendid type of virility and manhood. Half-seas over he may have been. His misfortunes were, in truth, enough to make any man take a drink; but you could not help but see that there was an air of spirituality about the forehead and the sensitive nostrils which redeemed the face from any suggestion of sensuality. And now and again a quaint smile would play round the corners of his mouth, and the whole wan face would light up as if with a sudden whimsical thought.</p>
				<p>Then all at once he threw back his head and yawned.</p>
				<p>Such a droll fellow! Yawning on the brink of eternity! It was, in truth, a pity he should hang!</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-14-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>Yes, the blind man yawned, loudly and long, like one who is ready for bed. And the harmless sound completed Stoutenburg’s exasperation. He once more gave the harsh word of command:</p>
				<p>“Take the varlet out and hang him!”</p>
				<p>Obviously this time it would be irrevocable. There was no one here to plead, and there was Jan, stolid and grim as was his wont, already at attention under the lintel⁠—a veritable tower of strength in support of his chief’s decisions.</p>
				<p>Jan was not in the habit of arguing with his lordship. This, or any other order, was as one to him. As for the blind vagabond⁠—well, Jan was as eager as his Magnificence to get the noose around the rascal’s throat. There were plenty of old scores to settle between them⁠—the humiliation of three months ago, which had sent Stoutenburg, disgraced and a fugitive, out of the land, had hit Jan severely, too.</p>
				<p>And that never-to-be-forgotten discomfiture was entirely due to this miserable caitiff, who, indeed would get naught but his deserts.</p>
				<p>The task, in truth, was a congenial one to <abbr>Jan.</abbr> A blind man was easy enough to deal with, and this one offered but little resistance. He had been half-asleep, it seems, and only woke to find himself on the brink of eternity. Even so, his good-humour did not forsake him.</p>
				<p>“Odd’s fish!” he exclaimed when, roughly shaken from his somnolence, he found himself in the hands of the soldiery. “I had forgotten this hanging business. You might have left a man to finish his dreams in peace.”</p>
				<p>He appeared dazed, and his speech was thick. He had been drinking heavily all the evening, and, save for an odd moment or so of lucid interval, he had been hopelessly fuddled all along. And he was merry in his cups; laughter came readily to his lips; he was full of quips and sallies, too, which kept the men in rare good-humour. In truth, the fellow would joke and sing apparently until the hangman’s rope smothered all laughter in his throat.</p>
				<p>But he had an unquenchable thirst; entreated the men to bring him a jug of wine.</p>
				<p>“Spanish wine,” he pleaded. “I dote on Spanish wine, but had so little of it to drink in my day. That villainous rascal Pythagoras⁠—some of you must have known the potbellied loon⁠—would always seize all there was to get. He and Socrates. Two scurvy runagates who should hang ’stead o’ me. Give me a mug of wine, for mercy’s sake!”</p>
				<p>The men had none to give, and the matter was referred to <abbr class="eoc">Jan.</abbr></p>
				<p>“Not another drop!” Jan declared with unanswerable finality. “The knave is quite drunk enough as it is.”</p>
				<p>“Ah!” the blind man protested with ludicrous vehemence. “But there thou’rt wrong, worthy <abbr>Jan.</abbr> No man is ever⁠—is ever drunk enough. He may be top-heavy, he may be as drunk as a lord, or as fuddled as David’s sow. He may be fuzzy, fou, or merely sottish; but sufficiently drunk? No!”</p>
				<p>A shout of laughter from the men greeted this solemn pronouncement. Jan shrugged his shoulders impatiently.</p>
				<p>“Well, that is as may be!” he rejoined gruffly. “But not another drop to drink wilt thou get from me.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, Jan,” the poor man protested, with a pitiable note of appeal, “my good Jan, think on it! I am about to hang! Wouldst refuse the last request of a dying man?”</p>
				<p>“Thou’rt about to hang,” Jan assented, unmoved. “Therefore, ’twere a pity to waste good liquor on thee.”</p>
				<p>“I’ll pay thee well, my good Jan,” Diogenes put in, with a knowing wink of his sightless eyes.</p>
				<p>“Pay me?” Jan retorted, with a grim laugh. “ ’Tis not much there’s left in thy pockets, I’m thinking.”</p>
				<p>“No,” the blind man agreed, nodding gravely. “These good men here did, in truth⁠—empty my pockets effectually awhile ago. ’Twas not with coin I meant to repay thee, good Jan⁠—”</p>
				<p>“With what, then?”</p>
				<p>“Information, Jan!” the blind man replied, sinking his voice to a hoarse whisper. “Information for the like of which his Lordship of Stoutenburg would give his ears.”</p>
				<p>Jan laughed derisively. The men laughed openly. They thought this but another excellent joke on the part of the droll fellow.</p>
				<p>“Bah!” Jan said, with a shrug of the shoulder. “How should a varlet like thee know aught of which his lordship hath not full cognisance already?”</p>
				<p>“His lordship,” the other riposted quickly, even whilst a look of impish cunning overspread his face⁠—“his lordship never was in the confidence of the Stadtholder. I was!”</p>
				<p>“What hath the Stadtholder to do with the matter?”</p>
				<p>“Oh, nothing, nothing!” the blind man replied airily. “Thou art obstinate, my good Jan, and ’tis not I who would force thee to share a secret for the possession of which, let me assure thee, his lordship would repay me not only with a tankard of his best wine, but with my life! Ay, and with a yearly pension of one thousand guilders to boot.”</p>
				<p>These last few words he had spoken quite slowly and with grave deliberation, his head nodding sagely while he spoke. The look of cunning in those spectral orbs had lent to his pale, wan face an air of elfin ghoulishness. He was swaying on his feet, and now and again the men had to hold him up, for he was on the very point of measuring his length on the hall floor.</p>
				<p>Jan did not know what to make of it all. Obviously the man was drunk. But not so drunk that he did not know what he was talking about. And the air of cunning suggested that there was something alive in the fuddled brain. Jan looked across the hall in the direction of the banqueting-room.</p>
				<p>The doors were wide open, and he could see that his lordship, who at first had paced up and down the long room like a caged beast, had paused quite close to the door, then advanced on tiptoe out into the hall, where he had remained for the last minute or two, intent and still, with eager, probing glance fixed upon the blind man. Now, when Jan questioned him with a look, he gave his faithful henchman a scarce perceptible sign, which the latter was quick enough to interpret correctly.</p>
				<p>“Thou dost set my mouth to water,” he said to the blind man, with well-assumed carelessness, “by all this talk of yearly pensions and of guilders. I am a poor man, and not so young as I was. A thousand guilders a year would keep me in comfort for the rest of my life.”</p>
				<p>“Yet art so obstinate,” Diogenes riposted with a quaint, inane laugh, “as to deny me a tankard of Spanish wine, which might put thee in possession of my secret⁠—a secret, good Jan, worth yearly pensions and more to his lordship.”</p>
				<p>“How do I know thou’rt not a consummate liar?” Jan protested gruffly.</p>
				<p>“I am!” the other riposted, wholly unruffled. “I am! Lying hath been my chief trade ever since I was breeched. Had I not lied to the Stadtholder he would not have entrusted his secrets to me, and I could not have bartered those secrets for a tankard of good Spanish wine.”</p>
				<p>“Thy vaunted secrets may not be worth a tankard of wine.”</p>
				<p>“They are, friend Jan, they are! Try them and see.”</p>
				<p>“Well, let’s hear them and, if they are worth it, I’ll pay thee with a tankard of his lordship’s best Oporto.”</p>
				<p>But the blind man shook his head with owlish solemnity.</p>
				<p>“And then sell them to his lordship,” he retorted, “for pensions and whatnot, whilst thine own hand, mayhap, puts the rope around my neck. No, no, my good Jan, say no more about it. I’d as lief see his lordship and thee falling into the Stadtholder’s carefully laid trap, and getting murdered in your beds, even while I am on my journey to kingdom come.”</p>
				<p>“Who is going to murder us?” Jan queried, frowning and puzzled, trying to get his cue once more from his master. “And how?”</p>
				<p>“I’ll not tell thee,” the blind man replied, with a quick turn to that obstinacy which so oft pertains to the drunkard, “not if thou wert to plunge me in a bath of best Oporto.”</p>
				<p>Some of the men began to murmur.</p>
				<p>“We might all share?” one or two of them suggested.</p>
				<p>“Let’s hear what it is,” others declared.</p>
				<p>“I’ll tell thee, knave, what I’ll do,” Jan rejoined decisively. “I’ll bring thee a tankard of Oporto to loosen thy tongue. Then, if thy secret is indeed as important as thou dost pretend, I’ll see that the hangman is cheated of thy carcass.”</p>
				<p>For awhile the blind man pondered.</p>
				<p>“Loosen my hands then, friend Jan,” he said, “for, in truth, I am trussed like a fowl; then let’s feel the handle of that tankard. After that we’ll talk.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-14-4" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>The soldiers sat around the table, watching the blind man with grave attention. At a sign from Jan they soon loosened his bonds. There was something magnetic in the air just then, something that sent sensitive nerves aquiver, and of which these rough fellow were only vaguely conscious. They could not look on that drunken loon without laughing. He was more comical than ever now, with that air of bland beatitude upon his face as his slender fingers closed around the handle of the tankard which Jan had just placed in his hand.</p>
				<p>“I would sell my soul for a butt of this nectar,” he said; and drank in the odour of the wine with every sign of delight, even before he raised the tankard to his lips.</p>
				<p>The Lord of Stoutenburg watched the blind man, too. A deep furrow between his brows testified to the earnest concentration of his thoughts. The man knew something, or thought he knew, of that his lordship could not be in doubt. The question was, was that knowledge of such importance as the miserable wretch averred, or was he merely, like any rogue who sees the rope dangling before his eyes, trying to gain a respite, by proposing vain bargains or selling secrets that had only found birth in his own fuddled brain. Stoutenburg, remember, was no psychologist. Indeed, psychology did not exist as a science in these days when men were over-busy with fighting, and had no time or desire to probe into the inner workings of one another’s soul.</p>
				<p>On the other hand, here was a man, thus his lordship argued to himself, who might know something of the Stadtholder’s plans. He was wont, before he rolled so rapidly down the hill of manhood and repute, to be an inimate of Maurice of Nassau. He might, as lately as yesterday, have been initiated into the great soldier’s plans for repelling this sudden invasion of the land which he had thought secure. The Stadtholder, in truth, was not the man to abandon all efforts at resistance just because his original plans had failed. True, the attempt to rescue Arnheim and Nijmegen had ended in smoke. Marquet and De Keysere were, thanks to timely warning, being held up somewhere by the armies of Isembourg and De Berg. But Maurice of Nassau would not, of a certainty, thus lightly abandon all hopes of saving Gelderland. He must have formulated a project, and Stoutenburg, who was no fool, was far from underestimating the infinite brain power and resourcefulness of that peerless commander. Whether he had communicated that project to this besotted oaf was another matter.</p>
				<p>Stoutenburg searched the blind man’s face with an intent glance that seemed to probe the innermost thoughts behind that fine, wide brow. For the moment, the face told him nothing. It was just vacant, the sightless eyes shone with delight, and the tankard raised to the lips effectually hid all expression around the mouth.</p>
				<p>Well, there was not much harm done, the waste of a few moments, if the information proved futile. Jan was ready with the rope, if the whole thing proved to be a mere trick for putting off the fateful hour. As the Lord of Stoutenburg gazed on the blind man, trying vainly to curb his burning impatience, he instinctively thought of Gilda. Gilda, and his hopeless wooing of her, her coldness toward him and her passionate adherence to this miserable caitiff, who, in truth, had thrown dust in her eyes by an outward show of physical courage and a mock display of spurious chivalry.</p>
				<p>What if the varlet had been initiated in the Stadtholder’s projects? What if he betrayed them now⁠—sold them in exchange for his own worthless life, and stood revealed, before all the world, as an abject coward, as base as any Judas who would sell his master for thirty pieces of silver? The thought turned the miscreant giddy, so dazzling did this issue appear before his mental vision. What a revelation for a fond and loyal woman, who had placed so worthless an object on a pinnacle of valour! What a disillusionment! She had staunchly believed in his integrity up to now. But after this?</p>
				<p>In truth, what more can a man desire than to see the honour of a rival smirched in the eyes of a woman who spurns him? That was the main thought that coursed through Stoutenburg’s brain, driving before it all obstinacy and choler, ay, even soothing his exacerbated nerves.</p>
				<p>He gave a sign to <abbr class="eoc">Jan.</abbr></p>
				<p>“Bring that varlet here to me,” he commanded. “I’ll speak to him myself.”</p>
				<p>The sound of his voice chased the look of beatitude from the blind man’s face, which took on an expression of bewildered surprise.</p>
				<p>“I had no thought his lordship was here,” he said, with a self-conscious, inane laugh.</p>
				<p>The men were murmuring audibly. Some of them had seen visions of good reward, shared amongst them all, after the blind man had been made to speak. But Jan paid no heed to their discontent. In a trice he had seen the blind man secure once more, with arms tied as before behind his back. Diogenes had uttered a loud cry of protest when the empty tankard was torn out of his hand.</p>
				<p>“Jan,” he shouted, in a thick, hoarse voice, “if thou’rt a knave and dost not keep faith with me, the devil himself will run away with thee.”</p>
				<p>“His Magnificence will hear what thou hast to say,” Jan retorted gruffly. “After that, we’ll see.”</p>
				<p>He led the prisoner through into the banqueting-hall, and despite the men’s murmurings, he closed the door upon them. He sat the blind man down in a chair, opposite his lordship. The poor loon had begun to whimper softly, just like a child, and continued to appeal pitiably to <abbr class="eoc">Jan.</abbr></p>
				<p>“If his lordship is satisfied,” he murmured confidingly, “you’ll see to it, Jan, that I do not hang.”</p>
				<p>“Jan has his orders!” his lordship put in roughly. “But take heed, sirrah! If your information is worth having, you may go to hell your own way; I care nought! But remember,” he added, with slow and stern emphasis, “if you trick me in this, ’twil not be the rope for you at dawn⁠—but the stake!”</p>
				<p>Diogenes gave a quick shudder.</p>
				<p>“By the lord,” he said blandly, “how very unpleasant! But I am a man of my word. Jan put good wine into me. He shall be paid for it. And I’ll tell you what the Stadtholder hath planned for the defeat of the Lord of Stoutenburg.”</p>
				<p>“Well,” his lordship retorted curtly. “I wait!”</p>
				<p>There was silence for a moment whilst the blind man apparently collected his thoughts. He sat, trussed and helpless in the chair, with his head thrown back, and the full light of the candles playing upon his pale face⁠—the latter still vacant and with a childish expression of excitement about those weird, dark orbs. The Lord of Stoutenburg, master of the situation, sat in a high-backed chair opposite him, his chin resting in his hand, his eyes, glowering and fierce, searching that strange, mysterious face before him. Strange and mysterious, in truth, with those sightless eyes, that glittered uncannily whenever the flickering candlelight caught the abnormally dilated pupils, and those quavering lips which every moment broke into a whimsical and inane smile.</p>
				<p>“Jan, my friend,” the blind man asked after a while, “art here?”</p>
				<p>“Ay!” Jan replied gruffly. “I’m here right enough to see that thou’rt up to no mischief.”</p>
				<p>“How can I be that, worthy Jan?” the other retorted blandly, “since thou hast again trussed me like a capon?”</p>
				<p>“Well, the sooner thou hast satisfied his lordship,” Jan rejoined with stolid indifference, “the sooner thou wilt be free⁠—”</p>
				<p>“To go to hell mine own way!” Diogenes put in with a hiccup. “So his lordship hath pledged his word. Let all those who are my friends bear witness that his lordship did pledge his word.”</p>
				<p>He paused, and once again a look of impish cunning overspread his face. He seemed to be preparing for a fateful moment which literally would mean life or death for him. An exclamation of angry impatience from Stoutenburg recalled him to himself.</p>
				<p>“I am ready,” he protested with eager servility, “to do his lordship’s pleasure.”</p>
				<p>“Then speak, man!” Stoutenburg retorted savagely, “ere I wring the words from thee with torture!”</p>
				<p>“I was only thinking how to put the matter clearly,” Diogenes protested blandly. “The Stadtholder only outlined his plan to me. There was so little time. My friend Klaas will remember that after his Highness’s horse bolted across the moor I was able to stop it⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Yes⁠—curse your interference!” Stoutenburg muttered between his teeth.</p>
				<p>“Amen to that!” the blind man assented. “But for it, I should still have the privilege of beholding your lordship’s pleasing countenance. But at the moment I had no thought save to stop a runaway horse. The Stadtholder was mightily excited, scented that a trap had been laid for him. My friend Klaas again will remember that, after his Highness dismounted he stopped to parley with me upon the moor.”</p>
				<p>Nicolaes nodded.</p>
				<p>“Then it was,” Diogenes went on, “that he told what he meant to do. I was, of course, to bear my part in the new project, which was to make a feint upon Ede⁠—”</p>
				<p>“A feint upon Ede?”</p>
				<p>“Ay! A surprise attack, which would keep De Berg, who is in Ede, busy whilst the Stadtholder⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Bah!” Stoutenburg broke in contemptuously, “De Berg is too wary to be caught by a feint.”</p>
				<p>“So he is, my lord, so he is!” Diogenes rejoined with solemn gravity. “But if I were to tell you that the surprise attack is to be made in full force, and that the weight will fall on the south side of the town, what then?”</p>
				<p>“I do not see with what object.”</p>
				<p>“Yet you, my lord, would know the Stadtholder’s tactics of old. You fought under his banner⁠—once.”</p>
				<p>“Before he murdered my father, yes!” Stoutenburg broke in impatiently. He did not relish this allusion to his former fighting days, before black treachery had made him betray the ruler he once served. “But what of that?”</p>
				<p>“For then your lordship would remember,” the blind man went on placidly, “that the Stadtholder’s favorite plan was always to draw the enemy away by a ruse from his own chief point of attack.”</p>
				<p>“But where would the chief point of attack be in this case?” Stoutenburg queried with a frown.</p>
				<p>“At a certain <span xml:lang="nl">molen</span> your lordship wot of on the Veluwe.”</p>
				<p>“Impossible!”</p>
				<p>“Oh, impossible? Your lordship is pleased to jest. Some days ago, spies came into Utrecht with the information that the Lord of Stoutenburg had his camp at an old <span xml:lang="nl">molen</span>, which stands disused and isolated on the highest point of the Veluwe, somewhere between Apeldoorn and Barneveld.”</p>
				<p>“My camp? Bah! The mill was only a halting place⁠—”</p>
				<p>“The spies averred, my lord,” the blind man broke in blandly, “that vast stores of arms and ammunition are accumulated in that halting-place. And that the attack on Amersfoort was planned within its rickety walls.”</p>
				<p>Then, as the Lord of Stoutenburg made no comment on this⁠—indeed, he had cast a rapid, significant glance on Nicolaes, who throughout this colloquy had appeared as keen, as interested, as his friend⁠—the blind man went on slowly:</p>
				<p>“The Stadtholder’s objective is the <span xml:lang="nl">molen</span> on the Veluwe.”</p>
				<p>“What? From Ede!” Nicolaes exclaimed.</p>
				<p>“No, no! Have I not said that the attack on Ede would be a feint? It will be the Stadtholder himself who, with a comparatively small force, will push on toward Barneveld and the <span xml:lang="nl">molen</span>, and at once cut off all communication between Ede and Amersfoort.”</p>
				<p>“I understand,” Stoutenburg rejoined, with a grave nod. “But if it is a small force we can easily⁠—”</p>
				<p>“You can now,” Diogenes assented coolly, “since you are warned.”</p>
				<p>“Quite right! Eh, friend Nicolaes?” his lordship retorted, and strove to let his harsh voice express a world of withering contempt. “If all this is not a trick you varlet hath served us well. What say you? Shall we let him go to hell his own way, and save the hangman a deal of pother?”</p>
				<p>“If it all prove true,” Nicolaes put in cautiously. “But what proof have we?”</p>
				<p>“None, in truth. Nor would I let this craven vagabond out of Jan’s sight until we do make sure that he hath not lied. But there’ll be no harm in being prepared. Here, sirrah!” his lordship continued, once more addressing the blind man. “With how strong a force doth the Stadtholder propose to cut us off from Ede?”</p>
				<p>But, during this brief colloquy between the two friends, the blind man had begun to nod. His head fell forward on his chest, the heavy lids veiled the stricken eyes, and anon a peaceable snore came through the partially open mouth. Stoutenburg swore, as was his wont, the moment his choler was roused, and Jan shook the prisoner roughly by the shoulder.</p>
				<p>“Eh? Eh? What?” the latter queried, blinked his sightless eyes, and turned a pale and startled face vaguely from side to side. “What is it? Where’s that confounded⁠—?</p>
				<p>“Answer his lordship’s question!” Jan commanded briefly.</p>
				<p>“Question? What question? Your lordship must forgive me. I am so fatigued, and that tankard of⁠—”</p>
				<p>“I asked thee, knave,” Stoutenburg broke in impatiently, “with how strong a force the Stadtholder proposed to cut us off from Ede?”</p>
				<p>“Call it four thousand, my lord,” the blind man babbled, “and let me go to sleep.”</p>
				<p>“You shall sleep till Judgement Day when I’ve done with you, sirrah! Will the Stadtholder lead that force in person?”</p>
				<p>The blind man winked and blinked, tried to collect his thoughts, which apparently had all wandered off toward the Land of Nod. Then he said:</p>
				<p>“The plan was to leave the bulk of that force to menace Amersfoort. But the Stadtholder himself meant to push on as far as the <span xml:lang="nl">molen</span>, with but a few hundred of his picked men. He thought to seize the stores of arms and ammunition there and then to await the coming of the Lord of Stoutenburg, who, driven out of Amersfoort and cut off from Ede, would make of necessity for his headquarters.”</p>
				<p>“Ah!”</p>
				<p>The exclamation, deep and prolonged, came from three pairs of lips. Stoutenburg, Nicolaes and Jan looked at one another, and there was triumph and satisfaction depicted in their glance. The same thought had occurred simultaneously to these three traitors; the Stadtholder, with a comparatively small force, pushing on to the lonely <span xml:lang="nl">molen</span> on the Veluwe, not knowing that some of De Berg’s troops were holding the Ijssel beyond.</p>
				<p>He would be caught like a rat in a trap; and the question was whether it would not be better to allow him to carry out his plan, not to oppose him on his way, to let him reach the <span xml:lang="nl">molen</span> and then close in behind him, so that he would have but two alternatives before him⁠—to surrender in the <span xml:lang="nl">molen</span> or to turn his small force in the direction of the Zuider Zee, and therein seek a watery grave.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-14-5" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>“I must have a little time to think,” Stoutenburg muttered to himself, after a while.</p>
				<p>The blind man had apparently dropped off to sleep again. His head had once more fallen forward on his chest. Jan was prepared to give him another rude awakening, but his lordship stopped him with a sign.</p>
				<p>“Let the muckworm sleep,” he said. “I must think out the whole position. If what the knave says is true⁠—”</p>
				<p>“I am inclined to believe it true,” Nicolaes interposed. “The man is too fuddled to have invented so circumstantial a story. And I have it in my mind,” he added reflectively, “that when the Stadtholder visited Amersfoort yesterday he said something to my father about devising a plan later on if the city were seriously threatened.”</p>
				<p>“Then, by Satan! all would be well indeed!” And Stoutenburg drew up his gaunt figure to its full height, looked every inch a conqueror, with heel set upon the neck of his foes. Jan alone looked dubious.</p>
				<p>“I wouldn’t trust the rogue,” he said grimly.</p>
				<p>“Would you hang him now?” Stoutenburg retorted.</p>
				<p>“No; I would wait to make sure. Let him sleep awhile now. When he wakes out of his booze, he might be able to give us further details.”</p>
				<p>“In the meanwhile,” his lordship rejoined, “keep the men under arms, <abbr>Jan.</abbr> I have not yet thought the matter over; but this I know⁠—that I’ll start for the <span xml:lang="nl">molen</span> with a few hundred musketeers and pikemen as soon as I am sure that this rascallion hath not spun a tissue of lies. Do you send out spies at once in every direction, with orders to bring back information immediately. We must hear if an attack hath indeed been made on Ede, and if the Stadtholder is moving out of Utrecht. Have you some men you can trust?”</p>
				<p>“Oh, yes, so please your lordship,” Jan replied. “I can send Piet Walleren in the direction of Ede, and I myself will push on toward Utrecht. We’d both be back long before dawn.”</p>
				<p>“And ’tis not you who could be nousled, eh, good Jan?” his lordship was pleased to say.</p>
				<p>“If we have been tricked by this tosspot,” Jan riposted gruffly, “I’ll see him burnt alive, and ’tis mine own hand will set the brand to the stake.”</p>
				<p>He paused, and drew in his breath with a shudder; for he had turned to look on the blind man whom he was threatening with so dire a fate and whom he had thought asleep, and encountered those sightless orbs fixed upon him as if they could see something through and beyond him, some ghoul or spectre lurking in a distant corner of the room. So uncanny and terrifying did the rascal look, indeed, that instinctively Jan, who believed neither in God nor the devil, remembered his mother’s early teachings, and made sundry and vague signs of the Cross upon his breast, with a view to exorcising those evil spirits which must be somewhere lurking about, unseen by all save by the man who had lost his sight.</p>
				<p>“What is it now?” Stoutenburg queried with a scowl.</p>
				<p>The blind man indeed appeared to be listening⁠—listening so intently, with head now craned forward and eyes fixed into vacancy⁠—that instinctively the three recreants listened too. To what, they could not have told. Through the open casement the sound of life⁠—camp life, of sentries’ challenging call, of bivouac fires, and rowdy soldiery⁠—came in as before. A little less roisterous, perhaps, seeing that most of the men, tired after long days of marching and hours of carousing, had settled themselves down to sleep.</p>
				<p>Inside the room, the monumental clock up against the wall ticked off each succeeding second with tranquil monotony. It was now close upon midnight. Nothing had happened. Nothing could have happened, to disturb the wonted tenor of the life of an army in temporary occupation of an unresisting city. Nothing, in fact, unless that blind tatterdemalion over there had indeed spoken the truth.</p>
				<p>And still he listened. A vague anxiety seemed to have completely banished sleep, even momentarily to have dissipated the potent effect of that excellent Oporto; and on his face there was that strained look peculiar to those who have been robbed of one sense and are at pains to exert the others to their utmost power. It seemed as if his sightless orbs must pierce some hidden veil which kept vital secrets hidden from ordinary human gaze. And these three men⁠—traitors all⁠—whose craven hearts, weighted with crime, were sensitive to every uncanny spell, felt their own senses unaccountably thrilled by that motionless, stony image of a man whose very soul appeared on the alert, and in whom life itself, was as it were, momentarily arrested.</p>
				<p>The spell continued for a moment or two. A minute, perhaps, went by; then, with an impatient curse, Stoutenburg jumped to his feet, strode rapidly to the window, and, leaning out far over the sill, he listened.</p>
				<p>Indeed, at first it was naught but the habitual confused sounds that reach his ear. But as he, in his turn, strained every sense to hear, something unusual seemed to mingle with the other sounds. A murmuring. Strange voices. A few isolated words that rose above the others, louder than the sentries’ call; also a patter of feet, like men running and a clang of arms that at this hour should have been stilled.</p>
				<p>The Lord of Stoutenburg could not have told you then why those sounds should have suddenly filled his mind with foreboding⁠—why, indeed, he heard them at all. Beneath the window, ranged against the wall, the men of his picked company were sleeping peacefully. Their bivouac fire fed by those on guard, shed a pleasant glow over the familiar scene. Beyond its ruddy gleam everything looked by contrast impenetrably dark. The river beyond it, nothing; only blackness⁠—a blackness that could be felt. The lights of the city had long since been extinguished, only one tiny glimmer, which came from a small oil-lamp, showed above the Koppel-poort.</p>
				<p>But that confused sound, that murmuring, came from the rear of the burgomaster’s house, from the direction of the Market Place, where the bulk of his lordship’s army was encamped.</p>
				<p>“What in thunder does it mean?” Stoutenburg muttered.</p>
				<p>Nicolaes came and joined him by the window. He, too, strained his ears to hear, feeling his nerves vaguely stirred by a kind of superstitious dread. But Stoutenburg turned to the blind man, and tried to read an answer in the latter’s white, set face.</p>
				<p>Jan shook Diogenes fiercely by the shoulder.</p>
				<p>“Dost hear, knave?” he said harshly. “What does it all mean?”</p>
				<p>“What does what mean, worthy Jan?” the blind man queried blandly.</p>
				<p>“Thou are listening for something. What is it? His lordship desires to know.”</p>
				<p>“Canst thou hear anything, friend Jan?” the other riposted serenely.</p>
				<p>“Only the usual sounds. What should I hear?”</p>
				<p>“The armies of the Stadtholder on the move.”</p>
				<p>An exclamation of incredulity broke from Stoutenburg’s lips. Nevertheless, he turned imperatively to <abbr class="eoc">Jan.</abbr></p>
				<p>“Go or send at once into the town,” he commanded. “Let us hear if anything has happened.”</p>
				<p>In a moment Jan was out of the room; and soon his gruff voice could be heard from outside, questioning and giving orders. He had gone himself to see what was amiss.</p>
				<p>And Stoutenburg, half incredulous, yet labouring under strong excitement, once more approached the window and, leaning far out into the night, set his ears to listen.</p>
				<p>His senses, too, were keyed up now, detached as they were from everything else except just what went on outside. The subdued murmurings reached his perceptions independently of every other sound. A hum of voices, and through it that of Jan, questioning and commanding; and others that talked agitatedly, with many interruptions.</p>
				<p>After awhile he felt that he could stand the strain no longer. Very obviously something had happened, something was being discussed out on the Market Place, and there was a kind of buzzing in the air, as if around the hive of bees that have been disturbed by a company of robber-wasps. And to him⁠—Stoutenburg⁠—for whom that buzzing might mean the first step toward the pinnacle of his desires, the turning point of his destiny, beyond which lay power, dominion, ambition satisfied, and passion satiated, every moment of suspense and silence became positive torture. A primeval, savage instinct would, but for the presence of Nicolaes, have driven him to seizing the helpless prisoner by the throat, and thus to ease the tension on his nerves and still the wild hammering of blood on his temples.</p>
				<p>But Nicolaes did, as it happened, exercise in this instance a restraining influence on his friend; quite unknowingly, of course, as his was the weaker nature. But the last half hour had wrought a marked change in Stoutenburg⁠—a subtle one, which he himself could not have defined. Before then, he had been striving for great things⁠—for revenge, for power, for the satisfaction of his passions. But now he felt that he had attained all that, and more. Obviously his stricken enemy had not lied. The Stadtholder was about to fall into a trap which was easy enough to set. The once brilliant Laughing Cavalier had sunk to a state of moral and physical degradation from which he could never now recover. And Gilda! Gilda had but to realize the slough of turpitude into which her former lover had sunk to turn gratefully and with a sigh of infinite relief to the man who had freed her from such a yoke.</p>
				<p>In truth, Stoutenburg felt that he no longer needed to climb. He had reached the summit. The summit of ambition, of power, of sentimental satisfaction. He was a conqueror now; master in the land of his birth; the future Stadtholder of the United Province, wedded to the richest heiress in the Netherlands; happy, feared, and obeyed.</p>
				<p>That was his position now, and that was the cause of the subtle change in him⁠—a change which forced him to keep his savage instincts in check before his servile friend; forced to try and appear before others as above petty passions; a justiciary and not a terrorist.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-14-6" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>The minutes sped by, leaden-footed for the impatience of these two men. Nicolaes and Stoutenburg, each trying to appear calm, hardly dared to speak with one another lest their speech betrayed the exacerbation of their nerves.</p>
				<p>It was Nicolaes’ turn now to pace up and down the room, to halt beside the window and peer out into the darkness in search of Jan’s familiar figure. Stoutenburg had once more taken a seat on the highbacked chair, striving to look dignified and detached. His arm was thrown over the table, and with his sharply pointed nails he was drumming a devil’s tatoo on the board.</p>
				<p>Alone, the blind man appeared perfectly serene. After that brief moment of comparative lucidity, he had relapsed into somnolence. Occasional loud snores testified that he was once more wandering in the Elysian fields of unconsciousness.</p>
				<p>Half an hour after midnight Jan returned.</p>
				<p>“There is no doubt about it,” were the first words he spoke. “An attack on Ede appears to be in progress, and the Stadtholder left his camp at Utrecht a couple of hours ago with a force of four thousand men.”</p>
				<p>He was out of breath, having run, he said, all the way from the Joris Poort, where he had gleaned the latest information.</p>
				<p>“Who brought the news?” his lordship asked.</p>
				<p>“No one seems to know, my lord,” Jan replied. “But everyone in the town has it. The rumour hath spread like wildfire. It started at opposite quarters of the city. The Nieuw Poort had it that a surprise attack had been delivered on Ede earlier in the evening, and the Joris Poort that the Stadtholder and his force are on the move. The captains at the gates had heard the news from runners who had come direct from Utrecht and from Ede.”</p>
				<p>“Where are those runners now?”</p>
				<p>“In both cases the captains sent them back for further information. The fellows were willing enough to go, for a consideration; but the business has become a dangerous one, for the roads to Utrecht and Ede, they averred are already full of the Stadtholder’s vedettes.”</p>
				<p>“Bah!” Stoutenburg ejaculated contemptuously. “A device for extorting money!”</p>
				<p>“Probably,” Jan riposted dryly. “But the money will be well spent if we get the information. The men are not to be paid until they return. And if they do not return⁠—” Jan shrugged his shoulders. If the spies did not return, it would go to prove that the Stadtholder’s vedettes were not asleep.</p>
				<p>“I sent Piet Wallerin and one or two others out, too,” he added, “with orders to push on both roads as far as possible, and bring back any information they can obtain⁠—the sooner the better.</p>
				<p>“They have not yet returned?” Stoutenburg asked.</p>
				<p>“Oh, no! They have only been gone half an hour.”</p>
				<p>“Is the night very dark?”</p>
				<p>“Very dark, my lord.”</p>
				<p>“Piet may never get back.”</p>
				<p>“In that case we shall know that the Stadtholder’s vanguard has sighted him,” Jan rejoined coolly. “Nothing else would keep Piet from getting back.”</p>
				<p>Stoutenburg nodded approval.</p>
				<p>“You think, then, that this varlet here spoke the truth?”</p>
				<p>“I have no longer any doubt of it, my lord,” Jan gave reply. “Though I did not actually speak with the men who seem originally to have brought the news, the captains at the Poorts had no doubt whatever as to its authenticity. But we shall know for certain before dawn. Piet and the others will have returned by then⁠—or not, as the case may be. But we shall know.”</p>
				<p>“And, of course, we are prepared?”</p>
				<p>“To do just what your lordship commands. The men will be under arms within the next two hours, and I can seek the Master of the Camp, and send him at once to your lordship for instructions.”</p>
				<p>“Mine instructions are simple enough, good Jan; and thou canst convey them to the Master of the Camp thyself. They are, to remain quiescent, under arms but asleep. To surrender the town if it be attacked⁠—”</p>
				<p>“To surrender?” Jan protested with a frown.</p>
				<p>“We must throw dust in the Stadtholder’s eyes,” Stoutenburg riposted. “Give the idea that we are feeble and unprepared, and that I have fled out of Amersfoort. The surrender of the city and its occupation will keep the main force busy, whilst Maurice of Nassau, anxious to possess himself of our person, will push on as far as the <span xml:lang="nl">molen</span>, where I, in the meanwhile, will be waiting for him.”</p>
				<p>His voice rang with a note of excitement and of triumph.</p>
				<p>“With the Stadtholder a prisoner in my hands,” he exclaimed, “I can command the surrender of all his forces. And then the whole of the Netherlands will be at my feet!”</p>
				<p>Never, in his wildest dreams had he hoped for this. Fate, in very truth, had tired of smiting him, had an overfull cornucopia for him now and was showering down treasures upon him, one by one.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-14-7" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>It was Nicolaes who first remembered the blind man.</p>
				<p>During the last momentous half-hour he had been totally forgotten. Stoutenburg during that time had been in close confabulation with Jan, discussing plans, making arrangements for the morrow’s momentous expedition. Neither of them seemed to feel the slightest fatigue. They were men of iron, whom their passions kept alive. But Nicolaes was a man of straw. He had been racked by one emotion after the other all day, and now he was so tired that he could hardly stand. He envied the blind man every time that a lusty snore escaped the latter’s lips, and tried to keep himself awake by going to the fire from time to time and throwing a log or two upon it. But he stood in too great an awe of his friend to dare own to fatigue when the future of his native land was under discussion.</p>
				<p>It was really in order to divert Stoutenburg’s attention from these interminable discussions on what to do and what not to do on the morrow, that presently, during a pause, he pointed to Diogenes.</p>
				<p>“What is to happen to this drunken loon?” he asked abruptly.</p>
				<p>Stoutenburg grinned maliciously.</p>
				<p>“Have no fear, friend Nicolaes,” he said. “The fate of our valued informer will be my special care. I have not forgotten him. Jan knows. While you were nodding, he and I arranged it all. You did not hear?”</p>
				<p>Nicolaes shook his head.</p>
				<p>“No,” he said. “What did you decide?”</p>
				<p>“You shall see, my good Klaas,” Stoutenburg replied with grim satisfaction. “I doubt not but what you’ll be pleased. And since we have now finished the discussion of our plans, Jan will at once go and bid the Heer Burgomaster rise from his bed and attend upon our pleasure.”</p>
				<p>“My father?” Nicolaes exclaimed in surprise. “Why? What hath he⁠—”</p>
				<p>“You will see, my good Klaas,” the other broke in quietly. “You will see. I think that you will be satisfied.”</p>
				<p>Jan, at his word, had already gone. Nicolaes, really puzzled, tried to ask questions, but Stoutenburg was obviously determined to keep the secret of his intentions awhile longer to himself.</p>
				<p>It was long past one o’clock now, and bitterly cold. Even the huge blazing logs in the monumental hearth failed to keep the large room at a pleasing temperature. Nicolaes, shivering and yawning, crouched beside the blaze, knocked his half-frozen hands one against the other. He would at this moment have bartered most of his ambitions for the immediate prospect of a good bed. But Stoutenburg was as wide awake as ever, and evidently some kind of inward fever kept the cold out of his bones.</p>
				<p>After Jan’s departure he resumed that restless pacing of his up and down the long room. Up and down, until Nicolaes, exasperated beyond endurance, could have screamed with choler.</p>
				<p>Less than a quarter of an hour later, the burgomaster arrived, ushered in by <abbr>Jan.</abbr> He had apparently not taken off his clothes since he had been upstairs. It was indeed more that likely that he had spent the time in prayer, for Mynheer Beresteyn was a pious man, and the will of God in fortune or adversity was a very real thing to him. With the same dignified submission which he had displayed throughout, he had immediately followed Jan when curtly ordered to do so. But he came down to face the arrogant tyrant for the third time tonight with as heavy a heart as before, not knowing what fresh indignity, what new cruel measure, would be put upon him. Grace or clemency he knew that he could not expect.</p>
				<p>The look of malignant triumph wherewith Stoutenburg greeted him appeared to justify his worst forebodings. The presence, too, of Diogenes, fettered and asleep, filled his anxious heart with additional dread. As he stepped out into the room he took no notice of his son, but only strove to face his arch-enemy with as serene a countenance as he could command.</p>
				<p>“Your lordship desired that I should come,” he said quietly. “What is your lordship’s pleasure?”</p>
				<p>But Stoutenburg was all suavity. A kind of feline gentleness was in his tone as he replied:</p>
				<p>“Firstly, to beg your forgiveness, mynheer, for having disturbed you again⁠—and at this hour. But will you not sit? Jan,” he commanded, “draw a chair nearer to the hearth for the Heer Burgomaster.”</p>
				<p>“I was not asleep, my lord,” Beresteyn rejoined coldly. “And by your leave, will take your commands standing.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, commands, mynheer!” Stoutenburg rejoined blandly. “ ’Tis no commands I would venture to give you. It was my duty⁠—my painful duty⁠—not to keep you in ignorance of certain matters which have just come to my knowledge, and which will have a momentous bearing upon all my future plans. Will you not sit?” he added, with insidious urbanity. “No? Ah, well, just as you wish. But you will forgive me if I⁠—”</p>
				<p>He sat down in his favourite chair, with his back to the table and the candlelight and facing the fire, which threw ruddy gleams on his gaunt face and grizzled hair. His deepset eyes were inscrutable in the shadow, but they were fixed upon the burgomaster who stood before him dignified and calm, half-turned away from the pitiful spectacle which the blind man presented in somnolent helplessness.</p>
				<p>“Since last I had the pleasure of addressing you, mynheer,” Stoutenburg began slowly, after awhile, “it hath come to my knowledge that the Stadtholder, far from abandoning all hope of reconquering Gelderland from our advancing forces, did in truth not only devise a plan whereby he intended to deliver Ede and Amersfoort from our hands, but his far-reaching project also embraced the possibility of seizing my person, and once for all ridding himself of an enemy⁠—a justiciary, shall we say?⁠—who is becoming might inconvenient.”</p>
				<p>“A project, my lord,” the burgomaster riposted earnestly, “which I pray God may fully succeed.”</p>
				<p>Stoutenburg gave a derisive laugh.</p>
				<p>“So it would have done, mynheer,” he said with a sardonic grin. “It would have succeeded admirably, and by this hour tomorrow I should no doubt be dangling on a gibbet, for Maurice of Nassau hath sworn that he would treat me as a knave and as a traitor unworthy of the scaffold.”</p>
				<p>“And the world would have been rid of a murderous miscreant,” the burgomaster put in coldly, “had God so willed it.”</p>
				<p>“Ah, but God⁠—your God, mynheer,” Stoutenburg retorted with a sneer, “did not will it, it seems. And forewarned is forearmed, you know.”</p>
				<p>Instinctively, as the full meaning of Stoutenburg’s words reached his perceptions the Burgomaster’s eyes had sought those of his son, whilst a ghastly pallor overspread his face even to his lips.</p>
				<p>“The Stadtholder’s schemes have been revealed to you,” he murmured slowly. “By whom?”</p>
				<p>Then, as Stoutenburg made no reply, only regarded him with a mocking and quizzical gaze, he added more vehemently:</p>
				<p>“Who is the craven informer who hath sold his master to you?”</p>
				<p>“What would you do to him if you knew?” Stoutenburg retorted coolly.</p>
				<p>“Slay him with mine own hand,” the burgomaster replied calmly, “were he my only son!”</p>
				<p>“ ’Twas not I!” Nicolaes cried involuntarily.</p>
				<p>Stoutenburg appeared vastly amused.</p>
				<p>“No,” he said. “It was not your son Klaas, whose merits, by the way, you have not yet learned to appreciate. Nicolaes hath rendered me and the Archduchess immense services, which I hope soon to repay adequately. But,” he added with mocking emphasis, “the most signal service of all, which will deliver the Stadtholder into my hands and reestablish thereby the dominion of Spain over the Netherlands, was rendered to me by the varlet whom, but for me, you would have acclaimed as your son.”</p>
				<p>And with a wide flourish of the arm, Stoutenburg turned in his chair and pointed to Diogenes, who, sublimely unconscious of what went on around him, was even in the act of emitting a loud and prolonged snore. Instinctively the burgomaster looked at him, his glance, vague and puzzled, wandered over the powerful figure of the blind man, the nodding head, the pinioned shoulders, and from him back to Stoutenburg, who continued to regard him⁠—Beresteyn⁠—with a malicious leer.</p>
				<p>“I fear me,” the latter murmured after awhile, “That your lordship will think me over-dull; but⁠—I don’t quite understand⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Yet, ’tis simple enough,” Stoutenburg rejoined; rose from his chair, and approached the burgomaster, as he spoke with a sudden fierce tone of triumph. “This miserable cur on whom Gilda once bestowed her love, seeing the gallows dangling before his bleary eyes, hath sold me the secrets which the Stadtholder did entrust him⁠—sold them to me in exchange for his worthless life! I entered into a bargain with him, and I will keep my pledge. In very truth, he hath saved my life by his revelations, and jeopardized that of the Stadtholder⁠—my most bitter enemy. Maurice of Nassau had thought to trap me in the lonely <span xml:lang="nl">molen</span> on the Veluwe which is my secret camp. Now ’tis I who will close the trap on him there, and hold his life, his honour, these provinces, at my mercy. And all,” he concluded with a ringing shout, “thanks to the brilliant adventurer, the chosen of Gilda’s heart, her English milor, mynheer!⁠—the gay and dashing Laughing Cavalier!”</p>
				<p>He had the satisfaction of seeing that the blow had gone home. The burgomaster literally staggered under it, as if he had actually been struck in the face with a whip. Certain it is that he stepped back and clutched the table for support with one hand, whilst he passed the other once or twice across his brow.</p>
				<p>“My God!” he murmured under his breath.</p>
				<p>Stoutenburg laughed as a demon might, when gazing on a tortured soul. Then he shrugged his shoulders and went on airily:</p>
				<p>“You are surprised, mynheer Burgomaster? Frankly, I was not. You believed this fortune-hunter’s tales of noble parentage and English ancestry. I did not. You doubted his treachery when he went on a message to Marquet, and sold that message to de Berg. I knew it to be a fact. My love for Gilda made me clear-sighted, whilst yours left you blind. Now you see him at last in his true colours⁠—base, servile, without honour and without faith. You are bewildered, incredulous, mayhap? Ask <abbr>Jan.</abbr> He was here and heard him. Ask my captains at the gate, my master of the camp. The Stadtholder is heading straight for the trap which he had set up for me, because the cullion who sits there did sell his onetime master to me.”</p>
				<p>The burgomaster, overcome with horror and with shame, had sunk into a chair and buried his face in his hands. The echo of Stoutenburg’s rasping voice seemed to linger in the noble panelled hall, its mocking accents to be still tearing at the stricken father’s aching heart, still deriding his overwhelming sorrow. Gilda! His proud, loving, loyal Gilda! If she were to know! A great sob, manfully repressed, broke from his throat and threatened to choke him.</p>
				<p>And for the first time in this day of crime and of treachery, Nicolaes felt a twinge of remorse knocking at the gates of his heart. He could not bear to look on his father’s grief, and not feel the vague stirrings of an affection which had once been genuine, even though it was dormant now. His father had been perhaps more just toward him than indulgent. Gilda had been the apple of his eyes, and he⁠—Nicolaes⁠—had been brought up in that stern school of self-sacrifice and self-repression which had made heroes of those of his race in their stubborn and glorious fight for liberty.</p>
				<p>No doubt it was that rigid bringing-up which had primarily driven an ambitious and discontented youth like Nicolaes into the insidious net spread out for him by the wily Stoutenburg. Smarting under the discipline imposed upon his self-indulgence by the burgomaster, he had lent a willing ear to the treacherous promises of his masterful friend, who held out dazzling visions before him of independence and of aggrandisement. Even at this moment Nicolaes felt no remorse for his treachery to his country and kindred. He was only sentimentally sorry to see his father so utterly broken down by sorrow.</p>
				<p>And then there was Gilda. Already, when Stoutenburg had placed that cruel “either⁠—or” before her, Nicolaes had felt an uncomfortable pain in his heart at the sight of her misery. Stoutenburg would have called it weakness, and despised him for it. But Stoutenburg’s was an entirely warped and evil nature, which revelled in crime and cruelty as a solace to past humiliation and disappointment, whereas Nicolaes was just a craven timeserver, who had not altogether succeeded in freeing himself from past teachings and past sentiments.</p>
				<p>And Gilda’s pale, tear-stained face seemed to stare at him through the gloom, reproachful and threatening, whilst his father’s heartrending sob tore at his vitals and shook him to the soul with a kind of superstitious awe. The commandment of Heaven, not wholly forgotten, not absolutely ignored, seemed to ring the death-knell of all that he had striven for, as if the Great Judge of All had already weighed his deeds in the balance, and decreed that his punishment be swift and sure.</p>
				<p>But Stoutenburg, in this the hour of his greatest triumph, had none of these weaknesses. Nor indeed did he care whether the burgomaster was stricken with sorrow or no. What he did do now was to go up to Jan, and from the latter’s belt take out a pistol. This he examined carefully, then he put it down upon the table close to where the burgomaster was sitting.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-14-8" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p>A quarter of an hour later the stately house on the quay appeared wrapped in the mantle of sleep. The soldiers, wearied and discontented, had after a good deal of murmuring, finally settled down to rest. They had collected what clothes, blankets, curtains even that they could lay their hands on, and wrapped up in these, they had curled themselves up upon the floor.</p>
				<p>We may take it, however, as a certainty that Jan remained wide awake, with one ear on that door which gave on the banqueting hall, and which he, at the command of his master, had carefully closed behind him.</p>
				<p>Upstairs, Nicolaes had thrown himself like an insentient and wearied mass upon his own bed in the room wherein he had slept as a child, as an adolescent, as a youth, now as a black-hearted traitor, haunted by memories and the ghoulish shadows, of his crime. He could not endure the darkness, so left a couple of wax candles burning in their sconces. Whether he actually fell asleep or no, he could not afterward have told you. Certain it is that he was not fully awake, but rather on that threshold of dreams which for those that are happy is akin to the very gate of paradise, but unto souls that are laden with crime is like the antechamber of hell. Half consciously Nicolaes could hear Stoutenburg pacing up and down an adjoining room, restless and fretful, like some untamed beast on the prowl.</p>
				<p>Then suddenly the sharp report of a pistol rang through the silence of the night. Nicolaes jumped from his bed, with a feeling of sheer physical nausea, which turned him dizzy and faint. Stoutenburg had paused abruptly in his febrile wanderings. To the listener it almost seemed as if he could hear his friend’s laboured breathing, the indrawing of a sigh that spoke of torturing suspense.</p>
				<p>A few minutes went by, and then a heavy step was heard ascending the stairs, after that, the closing and shutting of a door. Then nothing more.</p>
				<p>In that heavy step, Nicolaes had recognized his father’s. Even now he could hear the burgomaster moving about in his room close by, which had always been his. Gilda’s was further along, down the passage. Everything now seemed so still. Just for awhile, after the burgomaster had gone upstairs, Nicolaes had heard the soldiers moving down below. Rudely awakened from their sleep, they had done a good deal of muttering. Voices could be heard, and then a rattle, like the shaking of a door. But apparently the men had been quickly reassured by <abbr class="eoc">Jan.</abbr></p>
				<p>The silence acted as a further irritant on Nicolaes’ nerves. Taking up a candle, he went out of the room in search of Stoutenburg. Outside on the landing he came upon Jan, who was on the same errand bent.</p>
				<p>“What has happened?” the young man queried hoarsely.</p>
				<p>Jan shook his head. “Which is His Lordship’s room?” was all that he said.</p>
				<p>Nicolaes led the way, and Jan followed. They found Stoutenburg standing in the middle of the room which he had selected for his own use. He was still fully dressed, had not even taken off his boots. Apparently he was waiting for news, but otherwise he seemed quite calm.</p>
				<p>“Well?” he queried curtly, as soon as he caught sight of <abbr class="eoc">Jan.</abbr></p>
				<p>“We cannot get into the room,” Jan replied. “After we heard the shot fired, we saw the burgomaster come out of it; but he locked the door and, with the key in his hand he walked steadily up the stairs.”</p>
				<p>“How did he look?”</p>
				<p>“Like a man who had seen a ghost.”</p>
				<p>“Well?” Stoutenburg queried again, impatiently. “What did you do after that?”</p>
				<p>“I tried the door, of course. It is a stout piece of oak, and I had no orders to break it down. It would take a heavy joist, and the men are already grumbling⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Yes!” Stoutenburg put in curtly. “But the windows?”</p>
				<p>“I thought of them, and myself went round to look. Of course we could climb up to them, but they appeared to be barred and shuttered.”</p>
				<p>“So much the better!” his lordship retorted with a note of grim spite in his rasping voice. “Let the varlet’s carcase rot where it is. Why should we trouble? Go back to bed, Nicolaes,” he added after a slight pause. “And you too, <abbr>Jan.</abbr> As for me, I feel that I could sleep peacefully at last!”</p>
				<p>He threw himself on the bed with a long sigh of satisfaction, and when spoken to again by one of the others, he curtly ordered them to leave him in peace. So Jan did leave him, and went back to his men. But Nicolaes, terrified of solitude, which he felt would for him be peopled with ghouls, elected to find what rest he could in an armchair beside his friend. And a few minutes later the house was once more wrapped in the mantle of sleep.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
